aforesaid, and to cleanse the urinary passages. The powder of the said
root made into an electuary, or lozenges, with sugar, as also the bark
of the fresh roots boiled tender, and afterwards beaten to a conserve
with sugar, works the like effect. The powder of the roots strewed upon
the brims of ulcers, or mixed with any other convenient thing, and
applied, consumes the hardness, and causes them to heal the better.


    ROCKET.

IN regard the Garden Rocket is rather used as a sallad herb than to any
physical purposes, I shall omit it, and only speak of the common wild
Rocket. The description whereof take as follows.

_Descript._] The common wild Rocket has longer and narrower leaves,
much more divided into slender cuts and jags on both sides the middle
rib than the garden kinds have; of a sad green colour, from among
which rise up divers stalks two or three feet high, sometimes set with
the like leaves, but smaller and smaller upwards, branched from the
middle into divers stiff stalks, bearing sundry yellow flowers on them,
made of four leaves a-piece, as the others are, which afterwards yield
them small reddish seed, in small long pods, of a more bitter and hot
biting taste than the garden kinds, as the leaves are also.

_Place._] It is found wild in divers places of this land.

_Time._] It flowers about June or July, and the seed is ripe in August.

_Government and virtues._] The wild Rockets are forbidden to be used
alone, in regard their sharpness fumes into the head, causing aches
and pains therein, and are less hurtful to hot and choleric persons,
for fear of inflaming their blood, and therefore for such we may say
a little doth but a little harm, for angry Mars rules them, and he
sometimes will be restive when he meets with fools. The wild Rocket is
more strong and effectual to increase sperm and venerous qualities,
whereunto all the seed is more effectual than the garden kind. It
serves also to help digestion, and provokes urine exceedingly. The seed
is used to cure the biting of serpents, the scorpion, and the shrew
mouse, and other poisons, and expels worms, and other noisome creatures
that breed in the belly. The herb boiled or stewed, and some sugar put
thereto, helps the cough in children, being taken often. The seed also
taken in drink, takes away the ill scent of the arm-pits, increases
milk in nurses, and wastes the spleen. The seed mixed with honey,
and used on the face, cleanses the skin from morphew, and used with
vinegar, takes away freckles and redness in the face, or other parts;
and with the gall of an ox, it mends foul scars, black and blue spots,
and the marks of the small-pox.


    WINTER-ROCKET, OR CRESSES.

_Descript._] WINTER-Rocket, or Winter-Cresses, hath divers somewhat
large sad green leaves lying upon the ground, torn or cut in divers
parts, somewhat like unto Rocket or turnip leaves, with smaller pieces
next the bottom, and broad at the ends, which so abide all the Winter
(if it spring up in Autumn, when it is used to be eaten) from among
which rise up divers small round stalks, full of branches, bearing many
small yellow flowers of four leaves a-piece, after which come small
pods, with reddish seed in them. The root is somewhat stringy, and
perishes every year after the seed is ripe.

_Place._] It grows of its own accord in gardens and fields, by the
way-sides, in divers places, and particularly in the next pasture to
the Conduit-head behind Gray’s Inn, that brings water to Mr. Lamb’s
conduit in Holborn.

_Time._] It flowers in May, seeds in June, and then perishes.

_Government and virtues._] This is profitable to provoke urine, to help
stranguary, and expel gravel and stone. It is good for the scurvy,
and found by experience to be a singularly good wound herb to cleanse
inward wounds; the juice or decoction being drank, or outwardly applied
to wash foul ulcers and sores, cleansing them by sharpness, and
hindering or abating the dead flesh from growing therein, and healing
them by their drying quality.


    ROSES.

I HOLD it altogether needless to trouble the reader with a description
of any of these, since both the garden Roses, and the Roses of the
briars are well enough known: take therefore the virtues of them as
follows; And first I shall begin with the garden kinds.

_Government and virtues._] What a pother have authors made with Roses!
What a racket have they kept? I shall add, red Roses are under Jupiter,
Damask under Venus, White under the Moon, and Provence under the King
of France. The white and red Roses are cooling and drying, and yet the
white is taken to exceed the red in both the properties, but is seldom
used inwardly in any medicine: The bitterness in the Roses when they
are fresh, especially the juice, purges choler, and watery humours; but
being dried, and that heat which caused the bitterness being consumed,
they have then a binding and astringent quality: Those also that are
not full blown, do both cool and bind more than those that are full
blown, and the white Rose more than the Red. The decoction of red
Roses made with wine and used, is very good for the head-ache, and
pains in the eyes, ears, throat, and gums; as also for the fundament,
the lower part of the belly and the matrix, being bathed or put into
them. The same decoction with the Roses remaining in it, is profitably
applied to the region of the heart to ease the inflammation therein;
as also St. Anthony’s fire, and other diseases of the stomach. Being
dried and beaten to powder, and taken in steeled wine or water, it
helps to stay women’s courses. The yellow threads in the middle of
the Roses (which are erroneously called the Rose Seed) being powdered
and drank in the distilled water of Quinces, stays the overflowing of
women’s courses, and doth wonderfully stay the defluctions of rheum
upon the gums and teeth, preserving them from corruption, and fastening
them if they be loose, being washed and gargled therewith, and some
vinegar of Squills added thereto. The heads with the seed being used
in powder, or in a decoction, stays the lask and spitting of blood.
Red Roses do strengthen the heart, the stomach and the liver, and the
retentive faculty: They mitigate the pains that arise from heat,
assuage inflammations, procure rest and sleep, stay both whites and
reds in women, the gonorrhea, or running of the reins, and fluxes of
the belly: the juice of them doth purge and cleanse the body from
choler and phlegm. The husks of the Roses, with the beards and nails
of the Roses, are binding and cooling, and the distilled water of
either of them is good for the heat and redness in the eyes, and to
stay and dry up the rheums and watering of them. Of the Red Roses are
usually made many compositions, all serving to sundry good uses, viz.
Electuary of Roses, Conserve, both moist and dry, which is more usually
called Sugar of roses, Syrup of dry Roses, and Honey of Roses. The
cordial powder called _Diarrhoden Abbatis_, and _Aromatica Rosarum_.
The distilled Water of Roses, Vinegar of Roses, Ointment, and Oil of
Roses, and the Rose leaves dried, are of great use and effect. To
write at large of every one of these, would make my book smell too
big, it being sufficient for a volume of itself, to speak fully of
them. But briefly, the Electuary is purging, whereof two or three drams
taken by itself in some convenient liquor, is a purge sufficient for
a weak constitution, but may be increased to six drams, according to
the strength of the patient. It purges choler without trouble, it is
good in hot fevers, and pains of the head arising from hot choleric
humours, and heat in the eyes, the jaundice also, and joint-aches
proceeding of hot humours. The moist Conserve is of much use, both
binding and cordial; for until it be about two years old, it is more
binding than cordial, and after that, more cordial than binding. Some
of the younger Conserve taken with mithridate mixed together, is good
for those that are troubled with distillations of rheum from the brain
to the nose, and defluctions of rheum into the eyes; as also for
fluxes and lasks of the belly; and being mixed with the powder of
mastich, is very good for the gonorrhea, and for the looseness of the
humours in the body. The old Conserve mixed with Aromaticum Rosarum,
is a very good cordial against faintings, swoonings, weakness, and
tremblings of the heart, strengthens, both it and a weak stomach,
helps digestion, stays casting, and is a very good preservative in
the time of infection. The dry Conserve, which is called the Sugar of
Roses, is a very good cordial to strengthen the heart and spirits; as
also to stay defluctions. The syrup of dried red Roses strengthens a
stomach given to casting, cools an over-heated liver, and the blood
in agues, comforts the heart, and resists putrefaction and infection,
and helps to stay lasks and fluxes. Honey of Roses is much used in
gargles and lotions to wash sores, either in the mouth, throat, or
other parts, both to cleanse and heal them, and to stay the fluxes
of humours falling upon them. It is also used in clysters both to
cool and cleanse. The cordial powders, called Diarrhoden Abbatis and
Aromaticum Rosarum, do comfort and strengthen the heart and stomach,
procure an appetite, help digestion, stay vomiting, and are very good
for those that have slippery bowels, to strengthen them, and to dry
up their moisture. Red Rose-water is well known, and of familiar use
on all occasions, and better than Damask Rose-water, being cooling
and cordial, refreshing, quickening the weak and faint spirits, used
either in meats or broths, to wash the temples, to smell at the nose,
or to smell the sweet vapours thereof out of a perfuming pot, or cast
into a hot fire shovel. It is also of much good use against the redness
and inflammations of the eyes to bathe them therewith, and the temples
of the head; as also against pain and ache, for which purpose also
Vinegar of Roses is of much good use, and to procure rest and sleep,
if some thereof, and Rose-water together, be used to smell unto, or
the nose and temples moistened therewith, but more usually to moisten
a piece of a red Rose-cake, cut for the purpose, and heated between
a double folded cloth, with a little beaten nutmeg, and poppy-seed
strewed on the side that must lie next to the forehead and temples,
and bound so thereto all night. The ointment of Roses is much used
against heat and inflammations in the head, to anoint the forehead
and temples, and being mixt with _Unguentum Populneum_, to procure
rest: it is also used for the heat of the liver, the back and reins,
and to cool and heal pushes, wheals, and other red pimples rising in
the face or other parts. Oil of Roses is not only used by itself to
cool any hot swellings or inflammations, and to bind and stay fluxes
of humours unto sores, but is also put into ointments and plaisters
that are cooling and binding, and restraining the flux of humours. The
dried leaves of the red Roses are used both inwardly and outwardly,
both cooling, binding, and cordial, for with them are made both
_Aromaticum_, _Rosarum_, _Diarrhoden Abbatis_, and _Saccharum Rosarum_,
each of whose properties are before declared. Rose leaves and mint,
heated and applied outwardly to the stomach, stays castings, and very
much strengthen a weak stomach; and applied as a fomentation to the
region of the liver and heart, do much cool and temper them, and also
serve instead of a Rose-cake (as is said before) to quiet the over-hot
spirits, and cause rest and sleep. The syrup of Damask Roses is both
simple and compound, and made with Agaric. The simple solutive syrup
is a familiar, safe, gentle and easy medicine, purging choler, taken
from one ounce to three or four, yet this is remarkable herein, that
the distilled water of this syrup should notably bind the belly. The
syrup with Agaric is more strong and effectual, for one ounce thereof
by itself will open the body more than the other, and works as much on
phlegm as choler. The compound syrup is more forcible in working on
melancholic humours; and available against the leprosy, itch, tetters,
&c. and the French disease: Also honey of Roses solutive is made of the
same infusions that the syrup is made of, and therefore works the same
effect, both opening and purging, but is oftener given to phlegmatic
than choleric persons, and is more used in clysters than in potions,
as the syrup made with sugar is. The conserve and preserved leaves of
those Roses are also operative in gently opening the belly.

The simple water of Damask Roses is chiefly used for fumes to sweeten
things, as the dried leaves thereof to make sweet powders, and fill
sweet bags; and little use they are put to in physic, although they
have some purging quality; the wild Roses also are few or none of them
used in physic, but are generally held to come near the nature of the
manured Roses. The fruit of the wild briar, which are called Hips,
being thoroughly ripe, and made into a conserve with sugar, besides
the pleasantness of the taste, doth gently bind the belly, and stay
defluctions from the head upon the stomach, drying up the moisture
thereof, and helps digestion. The pulp of the hips dried into a hard
consistence, like to the juice of the liquorice, or so dried that
it may be made into powder and taken into drink, stays speedily the
whites in women. The briar ball is often used, being made into powder
and drank, to break the stone, to provoke urine when it is stopped,
and to ease and help the cholic; some appoint it to be burnt, and then
taken for the same purpose. In the middle of the balls are often found
certain white worms, which being dried and made into powder, and some
of it drank, is found by experience of many to kill and drive forth the
worms of the belly.


    ROSA SOLIS, OR SUN DEW.

IT is likewise called Red-rot, and Youth-wort.

_Descript._] It hath, divers small, round, hollow leaves somewhat
greenish, but full of certain red hairs, which make them seem red,
every one standing upon his own foot-stalk, reddish, hairy likewise.
The leaves are continually moist in the hottest day, yea, the hotter
the sun shines on them, the moister they are, with a sliminess that
will rope (as we say,) the small hairs always holding the moisture.
Among these leaves rise up slender stalks, reddish also, three or four
fingers high, bearing divers small white knobs one above another, which
are flowers; after which in the heads are contained small seeds. The
root is a few small hairs.

_Place._] It grows usually in bogs and wet places, and sometimes in
moist woods.

_Time._] It flowers in June, and the leaves are then fittest to be
gathered.

_Government and virtues._] The Sun rules it, and it is under the
sign Cancer. Rose Solis is accounted good to help those that have a
salt rheum distilling on their lungs, which breeds a consumption,
and therefore the distilled water thereof in wine is held fit and
profitable for such to drink, which water will be of a good yellow
colour. The same water is held to be good for all other diseases of the
lungs, as phthisicks, wheezings, shortness of breath, or the cough;
as also to heal the ulcers that happen in the lungs; and it comforts
the heart and fainting spirits. The leaves, outwardly applied to the
skin will raise blisters, which has caused some to think it dangerous
to be taken inwardly; but there are other things which will also draw
blisters, yet nothing dangerous to be taken inwardly. There is an usual
drink made thereof with aqua vitæ and spices frequently, and without
any offence or danger, but to good purpose used in qualms and passions
of the heart.


    ROSEMARY.

OUR garden Rosemary is so well known, that I need not describe it.

_Time._] It flowers in April and May with us, sometimes again in August.

_Government and virtues._] The Sun claims privilege in it, and it is
under the celestial Ram. It is an herb of as great use with us in these
days as any whatsoever, not only for physical but civil purposes. The
physical use of it (being my present task) is very much used both for
inward and outward diseases, for by the warming and comforting heat
thereof it helps all cold diseases, both of the head, stomach, liver,
and belly. The decoction thereof in wine, helps the cold distillations
of rheum into the eyes, and all other cold diseases of the head and
brain, as the giddiness or swimmings therein, drowsiness or dullness
of the mind and senses like a stupidness, the dumb palsy, or loss of
speech, the lethargy, and fallen-sickness, to be both drank, and the
temples bathed therewith. It helps the pains in the gums and teeth,
by rheum falling into them, not by putrefaction, causing an evil
smell from them, or a stinking breath. It helps a weak memory, and
quickens the senses. It is very comfortable to the stomach in all the
cold griefs thereof, helps both retention of meat, and digestion,
the decoction or powder being taken in wine. It is a remedy for the
windiness in the stomach, bowels, and spleen, and expels it powerfully.
It helps those that are liver-grown, by opening the obstructions
thereof. It helps dim eyes, and procures a clear sight, the flowers
thereof being taken all the while it is flowering every morning
fasting, with bread and salt. Both Dioscorides and Galen say, That if
a decoction be made thereof with water, and they that have the yellow
jaundice exercise their bodies directly after the taking thereof, it
will certainly cure them. The flowers and conserve made of them, are
singularly good to comfort the heart, and to expel the contagion of
the pestilence; to burn the herb in houses and chambers, corrects the
air in them. Both the flowers and leaves are very profitable for women
that are troubled with the whites, if they be daily taken. The dried
leaves shred small, and taken in a pipe, as tobacco is taken, helps
those that have any cough, phthisic, or consumption, by warming and
drying the thin distillations which cause those diseases. The leaves
are very much used in bathings; and made into ointments or oil, are
singularly good to help cold benumbed joints, sinews, or members. The
chymical oil drawn from the leaves and flowers, is a sovereign help for
all the diseases aforesaid, to touch the temples and nostrils with two
or three drops for all the diseases of the head and brain spoken of
before; as also to take one drop, two, or three, as the case requires,
for the inward griefs: Yet must it be done with discretion, for it is
very quick and piercing, and therefore but a little must be taken at a
time. There is also another oil made by insolation in this manner: Take
what quantity you will of the flowers, and put them into a strong glass
close stopped, tie a fine linen cloth over the mouth, and turn the
mouth down into another strong glass, which being set in the sun, an
oil will distil down into the lower glass, to be preserved as precious
for divers uses, both inward and outward, as a sovereign balm to heal
the disease before-mentioned, to clear dim sights, and to take away
spots, marks, and scars in the skin.


    RHUBARB, OR REPHONTIC.

DO not start, and say, This grows you know not how far off: and then
ask me, How it comes to pass that I bring it among our English simples?
For though the name may speak it foreign, yet it grows with us in
England, and that frequent enough in our gardens; and when you have
thoroughly pursued its virtues, you will conclude it nothing inferior
to that which is brought out of China, and by that time this hath been
as much used as that hath been, the name which the other hath gotten
will be eclipsed by the fame of this; take therefore a description at
large of it as follows:

_Descript._] At the first appearing out of the ground, when the winter
is past, it hath a great round brownish head, rising from the middle
or sides of the root, which opens itself into sundry leaves one after
another, very much crumpled or folded together at the first, and
brownish: but afterwards it spreads itself, and becomes smooth, very
large and almost round, every one standing on a brownish stalk of the
thickness of a man’s thumb, when they are grown to their fulness, and
most of them two feet and more in length, especially when they grow in
any moist or good ground; and the stalk of the leaf, from the bottom
thereof to the leaf itself, being also two feet, the breadth thereof
from edge to edge, in the broadest place, being also two feet, of a
sad or dark green colour, of a fine tart or sourish taste, much more
pleasant than the garden or wood sorrel. From among these rise up some,
but not every year, strong thick stalks, not growing so high as the
Patience, or garden Dock, with such round leaves as grow below, but
small at every joint up to the top, and among the flowers, which are
white, spreading forth into many branches, consisting of five or six
small leaves a-piece, hardly to be discerned from the white threads in
the middle, and seeming to be all threads, after which come brownish
three square seeds, like unto other Docks, but larger, whereby it
may be plainly known to be a Dock. The root grows in time to be very
great, with divers and sundry great spreading branches from it, of a
dark brownish or reddish colour on the outside, having a pale yellow
skin under it, which covers the inner substance or root, which rind
and skin being pared away, the root appears of so fresh and lively a
colour, with fresh coloured veins running through it, that the choicest
of that Rhubarb that is brought us from beyond the seas cannot excel
it, which root, if it be dried carefully, and as it ought (which must
be in our country by the gentle heat of a fire, in regard the sun is
not hot enough here to do it, and every piece kept from touching one
another) will hold its colour almost as well as when it is fresh, and
has been approved of, and commended by those who have oftentimes used
them.

_Place._] It grows in gardens, and flowers about the beginning and
middle of June, and the seed is ripe in July.

_Time._] The roots that are to be dried and kept all the year
following, are not to be taken up before the stalk and leaves be
quite turned red and gone, and that is not until the middle or end of
October, and if they be taken a little before the leaves do spring, or
when they are sprung up, the roots will not have half so good a colour
in them.

I have given the precedence unto this, because in virtues also it
hath the pre-eminence. I come now to describe unto you that which is
called Patience, or Monk’s Rhubarb; and the next unto that, the great
round-leaved Dock, or Bastard Rhubarb, for the one of these may happily
supply in the absence of the other, being not much unlike in their
virtues, only one more powerful and efficacious than the other. And
lastly, shall shew you the virtues of all the three sorts.


    GARDEN-PATIENCE, OR MONK’S RHUBARB.

_Descript._] THIS is a Dock bearing the name of Rhubarb for some
purging quality therein, and grows up with large tall stalks, set
with somewhat broad and long, fair, green leaves, not dented at all.
The tops of the stalks being divided into many small branches, bear
reddish or purplish flowers, and three-square seed, like unto other
Docks. The root is long, great and yellow, like unto the wild Docks,
but a little redder; and if it be a little dried, shews less store of
discoloured veins than the other does when it is dry.


    GREAT ROUND-LEAVED DOCK, OR BASTARD
    RHUBARB.

_Descript._] THIS has divers large, round, thin, yellowish green leaves
rising from the root, a little waved about the edges, every one
standing upon a reasonably thick and long brownish footstalk, from
among which rises up a pretty big stalk, about two feet high, with
some such high leaves growing thereon, but smaller; at the top whereof
stand in a long spike many small brownish flowers, which turn into a
hard three square shining brown seed, like the garden Patience before
described. The root grows greater than that, with many branches or
great fibres thereat, yellow on the outside, and somewhat pale; yellow
within, with some discoloured veins like to the Rhubarb which is first
described, but much less than it, especially when it is dry.

_Place and Time._] These also grow in gardens, and flower and seed at
or near the same time that our true Rhubarb doth, viz. they flower in
June, and the seed is ripe in July.

_Government and virtues._] Mars claims predominancy over all these
wholesome herbs: You cry out upon him for an unfortunate, when God
created him for your good (only he is angry with fools.) What dishonour
is this, not to Mars, but to God himself. A dram of the dried root of
Monk’s Rhubarb, with a scruple of Ginger made into powder, and taken
fasting in a draught or mess of warm broth, purges choler and phlegm
downwards very gently and safely without danger. The seed thereof
contrary doth bind the belly, and helps to stay any sort of lasks or
bloody-flux. The distilled water thereof is very profitably used to
heal scabs; also foul ulcerous sores, and to allay the inflammation
of them; the juice of the leaves or roots or the decoction of them in
vinegar, is used as the most effectual remedy to heal scabs and running
sores.

The Bastard Rhubarb hath all the properties of the Monk’s Rhubarb, but
more effectual for both inward and outward diseases. The decoction
thereof without vinegar dropped into the ears, takes away the pains;
gargled in the mouth, takes away the tooth ache; and being drank, heals
the jaundice. The seed thereof taken, eases the gnawing and griping
pains of the stomach, and takes away the loathing thereof unto meat.
The root thereof helps the ruggedness of the nails, and being boiled
in wine helps the swelling of the throat, commonly called the king’s
evil, as also the swellings of the kernels of the ears. It helps them
that are troubled with the stone, provokes urine, and helps the dimness
of the sight. The roots of this Bastard Rhubarb are used in opening
and purging diet-drinks, with other things, to open the liver, and to
cleanse and cool the blood.

The properties of that which is called the English Rhubarb are the same
with the former, but much more effectual, and hath all the properties
of the true Italian Rhubarbs, except the force in purging, wherein it
is but of half the strength thereof, and therefore a double quantity
must be used: it likewise hath not that bitterness and astriction; in
other things it works almost in an equal quantity, which are these: It
purges the body of choler and phlegm, being either taken of itself,
made into powder, and drank in a draught of white wine, or steeped
therein all night, and taken fasting, or put among other purges, as
shall be thought convenient, cleansing the stomach, liver, and blood,
opening obstructions, and helping those griefs that come thereof, as
the jaundice, dropsy, swelling of the spleen, tertain and daily agues,
and pricking pains of the sides; and also stays spitting of blood.
The powder taken with cassia dissolved, and washed Venice turpentine,
cleanses the reins and strengthens them afterwards, and is very
effectual to stay the gonorrhea. It is also given for the pains and
swellings in the head, for those that are troubled with melancholy,
and helps the sciatica, gout, and the cramp. The powder of the Rhubarb
taken with a little mummia and madder roots in some red wine, dissolves
clotted blood in the body, happening by any fall or bruise, and helps
burstings and broken parts, as well inward as outward. The oil likewise
wherein it hath been boiled, works the like effects being anointed.
It is used to heal those ulcers that happen in the eyes or eyelids,
being steeped and strained; as also to assuage the swellings and
inflammations; and applied with honey, boiled in wine, it takes away
all blue spots or marks that happen therein. Whey or white wine are the
best liquors to steep it in, and thereby it works more effectual in
opening obstructions, and purging the stomach and liver. Many do use a
little Indian Spikenard as the best corrector thereof.


    MEADOW-RUE.

_Descript._] MEADOW-RUE rises up with a yellow stringy root, much
spreading in the ground, shooting forth new sprouts round about, with
many herby green stalks, two feet high, crested all the length of them,
set with joints here and there, and many large leaves on them, above
as well as below, being divided into smaller leaves, nicked or dented
in the fore part of them, of a red green colour on the upper-side, and
pale green underneath; Toward the top of the stalk there shoots forth
divers short branches, on every one whereof stand two, three or four
small heads, or buttons, which breaking the skin that incloses them,
shoots forth a tuft of pale greenish yellow threads, which falling
away, there come in their places small three-cornered cods, wherein
is contained small, long and round seed. The whole plant has a strong
unpleasant scent.

_Place._] It grows in many places of this land, in the borders of moist
meadows, and ditch-sides.

_Time._] It flowers about July, or the beginning of August.

_Government and virtues._] Dioscorides saith, That this herb bruised
and applied, perfectly heals old sores, and the distilled water of
the herb and flowers doth the like. It is used by some among other
pot-herbs to open the body, and make it soluble; but the roots washed
clean, and boiled in ale and drank, provokes to stool more than the
leaves, but yet very gently. The root boiled in water, and the places
of the body most troubled with vermin and lice washed therewith while
it is warm, destroys them utterly. In Italy it is good against the
plague, and in Saxony against the jaundice, as _Camerarius_ saith.


    GARDEN-RUE.

GARDEN-RUE is so well known by this name, and the name Herb of Grace,
that I shall not need to write any farther description of it, but shall
shew you the virtue of it, as follows.

_Government and virtues._] It is an herb of the Sun, and under Leo.
It provokes urine and women’s courses, being taken either in meat
or drink. The seed thereof taken in wine, is an antidote against
all dangerous medicines or deadly poisons. The leaves taken either
by themselves, or with figs and walnuts, is called Mithridate’s
counter-poison against the plague, and causes all venomous things
to become harmless; being often taken in meat and drink, it abates
venery. A decoction thereof with some dried dill leaves and flowers,
eases all pains and torments, inwardly to be drank, and outwardly to
be applied warm to the place grieved. The same being drank, helps the
pains both of the chest and sides, as also coughs and hardness of
breathing, the inflammations of the lungs, and the tormenting pains of
the sciatica and the joints, being anointed, or laid to the places;
as also the shaking fits of agues, to take a draught before the fit
comes. Being boiled or infused in oil, it is good to help the wind
cholic, the hardness and windiness of the mother, and frees women from
the strangling or suffocation thereof, if the share and the parts
thereabouts be anointed therewith. It kills and drives forth the worms
of the belly, if it be drank after it is boiled in wine to the half,
with a little honey; it helps the gout or pains in the joints, hands,
feet or knees, applied thereunto; and with figs it helps the dropsy,
being bathed therewith: Being bruised and put into the nostrils, it
stays the bleeding thereof. It takes away wheals and pimples, if being
bruised with a few myrtle leaves, it be made up with wax, and applied.
It cures the morphew, and takes away all sorts of warts, if boiled in
wine with some pepper and nitre, and the place rubbed therewith, and
with almond and honey helps the dry scabs, or any tetter or ringworm.
The juice thereof warmed in a pomegranate shell or rind, and dropped
into the ears, helps the pains of them. The juice of it and fennel,
with a little honey, and the gall of a cock put thereunto, helps the
dimness of the eye-sight. An ointment made of the juice thereof with
oil of roses, ceruse, and a little vinegar, and anointed, cures St.
Anthony’s fire, and all running sores in the head: and the stinking
ulcers of the nose, or other parts. The antidote used by Mithridates,
every morning fasting, to secure himself from any poison or infection,
was this: Take twenty leaves of rue, a little salt, a couple of
walnuts, and a couple of figs, beaten together into a mess, with twenty
juniper berries, which is the quantity appointed for every day. Another
electuary is made thus: Take of nitre, pepper, and cummin seed, of
each equal parts; of the leaves of Rue clean picked, as much in weight
as all the other three weighed; beat them well together, and put as
much honey as will make it up into an electuary (but you must first
steep your cummin seed in vinegar twenty four hours, and then dry
it, or rather roast it in a hot fire-shovel, or in an oven) and is a
remedy for the pains or griefs in the chest or stomach, of the spleen,
belly, or sides, by wind or stitches; of the liver by obstructions;
of the reins and bladder by the stopping of urine; and helps also to
extenuate fat corpulent bodies. What an infamy is cast upon the ashes
of Mithridates, or Methridates (as the Augustines read his name)
by unworthy people. They that deserve no good report themselves,
love to give none to others, _viz._ That renowned King of Pontus
fortified his body by poison against poison. (_He cast out devils by_
Beelzebub, _Prince of the devils._) What a sot is he that knows not
if he had accustomed his body to cold poisons, but poisons would have
dispatched him? on the contrary, if not, corrosions would have done
it. The whole world is at this present time beholden to him for his
studies in physic, and he that uses the quantity but of an hazel-nut
of that receipt every morning, to which his name is adjoined, shall
to admiration preserve his body in health, if he do but consider that
Rue is an herb of the Sun, and under Leo, and gather it and the rest
accordingly.


    RUPTURE-WORT.

_Descript._] THIS spreads very many thready branches round about upon
the ground, about a span long, divided into many other smaller parts
full of small joints set very thick together, whereat come forth two
very small leaves of a French yellow, green coloured branches and
all, where grows forth also a number of exceedingly small yellowish
flowers, scarce to be discerned from the stalks and leaves, which turn
into seeds as small as the very dust. The root is very long and small,
thrusting down deep into the ground. This has neither smell nor taste
at first, but afterwards has a little astringent taste, without any
manifest heat; yet a little bitter and sharp withal.

_Place._] It grows in dry, sandy, and rocky places.

_Time._] It is fresh and green all the Summer.

_Government and virtues._] They say Saturn causes ruptures; if he
do, he does no more than he can cure; if you want wit, he will teach
you, though to your cost. This herb is Saturn’s own, and is a noble
antivenerean. Rupture-wort hath not its name in vain: for it is found
by experience to cure the rupture, not only in children but also in
elder persons, if the disease be not too inveterate, by taking a dram
of the powder of the dried herb every day in wine, or a decoction made
and drank for certain days together. The juice or distilled water of
the green herb, taken in the same manner, helps all other fluxes either
of man or woman; vomitings also, and the gonorrhea, being taken any of
the ways aforesaid. It doth also most assuredly help those that have
the stranguary, or are troubled with the stone or gravel in the reins
or bladder. The same also helps stitches in the sides, griping pains
of the stomach or belly, the obstructions of the liver, and cures the
yellow jaundice; likewise it kills also the worms in children. Being
outwardly applied, it conglutinates wounds notably, and helps much to
stay defluctions of rheum from the head to the eyes, nose, and teeth,
being bruised green and bound thereto; or the forehead, temples, or the
nape of the neck behind, bathed with the decoction of the dried herb.
It also dries up the moisture of fistulous ulcers, or any other that
are foul and spreading.


    RUSHES.

ALTHOUGH there are many kinds of Rushes, yet I shall only here insist
upon those which are best known, and most medicinal; as the bulrushes,
and other of the soft and smooth kinds, which grow so commonly in
almost every part of this land, and are so generally noted, that I
suppose it needless to trouble you with any description of them:
Briefly then take the virtues of them as follows:

_Government and virtues._] The seed of the soft Rushes, (saith
Dioscorides and Galen, toasted, saith Pliny) being drank in wine and
water, stays the lask and women’s courses, when they come down too
abundantly: but it causes head-ache; it provokes sleep likewise,
but must be given with caution. The root boiled in water, to the
consumption of one third, helps the cough.

Thus you see that conveniences have their inconveniences, and virtue is
seldom unaccompanied with some vices. What I have written concerning
Rushes, is to satisfy my countrymen’s questions: _Are our Rushes good
for nothing?_ Yes, and as good let them alone as taken. There are
remedies enough without them for any disease, and therefore as the
proverb is, I care not a rush for them; or rather they will do you as
much good as if one had given you a Rush.


    RYE.

THIS is so well known in all the counties of this land, and especially
to the country-people, who feed much thereon, that if I did describe
it, they would presently say, I might as well have spared that labour.
Its virtue follows.

_Government and virtues._] Rye is more digesting than wheat; the bread
and the leaven thereof ripens and breaks imposthumes, boils, and other
swellings: The meal of Rye put between a double cloth, and moistened
with a little vinegar, and heated in a pewter dish, set over a chafing
dish of coals, and bound fast to the head while it is hot, doth much
ease the continual pains of the head. Matthiolus saith, that the ashes
of Rye straw put into water, and steeped therein a day and a night, and
the chops of the hands or feet washed therewith, doth heal them.


    SAFFRON.

THE herb needs no description, it being known generally where it grows.

_Place._] It grows frequently at Walden in Essex, and in Cambridgeshire.

_Government and virtues._] It is an herb of the Sun, and under the
Lion, and therefore you need not demand a reason why it strengthens the
heart so exceedingly. Let not above ten grains be given at one time,
for the Sun, which is the fountain of light, may dazzle the eyes, and
make them blind; a cordial being taken in an immoderate quantity, hurts
the heart instead of helping it. It quickens the brain, for the Sun is
exalted in Aries, as he hath his house in Leo. It helps consumptions of
the lungs, and difficulty of breathing. It is excellent in epidemical
diseases, as pestilence, small-pox, and measles. It is a notable
expulsive medicine, and a notable remedy for the yellow jaundice. My
opinion is, (but I have no author for it) that hermodactyls are nothing
else but the roots of Saffron dried; and my reason is, that the roots
of all crocus, both white and yellow, purge phlegm as hermodactyls do;
and if you please to dry the roots of any crocus, neither your eyes
nor your taste shall distinguish them from hermodactyls.


    SAGE.

OUR ordinary garden Sage needs no description.

_Time._] It flowers in or about July.

_Government and virtues._] Jupiter claims this, and bids me tell you,
it is good for the liver, and to breed blood. A decoction of the leaves
and branches of Sage made and drank, saith Dioscorides, provokes urine,
brings down women’s courses, helps to expel the dead child, and causes
the hair to become black. It stays the bleeding of wounds, and cleanses
foul ulcers. Three spoonfuls of the juice of Sage taken fasting, with
a little honey, doth presently stay the spitting or casting of blood
of them that are in a consumption. These pills are much commended;
Take of spikenard, ginger, of each two drams; of the seed of Sage
toasted at the fire, eight drams; of long pepper, twelve drams; all
these being brought into powder, put thereto so much juice of Sage
as may make them into a mass of pills, taking a dram of them every
morning fasting, and so likewise at night, drinking a little pure water
after them. Matthiolus saith, it is very profitable for all manner of
pains in the head coming of cold and rheumatic humours: as also for
all pains of the joints, whether inwardly or outwardly, and therefore
helps the falling-sickness, the lethargy, such as are dull and heavy
of spirit, the palsy; and is of much use in all defluctions of rheum
from the head, and for the diseases of the chest or breast. The leaves
of Sage and nettles bruised together, and laid upon the imposthume
that rises behind the ears, doth assuage it much. The juice of Sage
taken in warm water, helps a hoarseness and a cough. The leaves sodden
in wine, and laid upon the place affected with the palsy, helps much,
if the decoction be drank; Also Sage taken with wormwood is good for
the bloody-flux. Pliny saith, it procures women’s courses, and stays
them coming down too fast: helps the stinging and biting of serpents,
and kills the worms that breed in the ear, and in sores. Sage is of
excellent use to help the memory, warming and quickening the senses;
and the conserve made of the flowers is used to the same purpose, and
also for all the former recited diseases. The juice of Sage drank
with vinegar, hath been of good use in time of the plague at all
times. Gargles likewise are made with Sage, rosemary, honey-suckles,
and plantain, boiled in wine or water, with some honey or allum put
thereto, to wash sore mouths and throats, cankers, or the secret parts
of man or woman, as need requires. And with other hot and comfortable
herbs, Sage is boiled to bathe the body and the legs in the Summer
time, especially to warm cold joints, or sinews, troubled with the
palsy and cramp, and to comfort and strengthen the parts. It is much
commended against the stitch, or pains in the side coming of wind, if
the place be fomented warm with the decoction thereof in wine, and the
herb also after boiling be laid warm thereunto.


    WOOD-SAGE.

_Descript._] WOOD-SAGE rises up with square hoary stalks, two feet
high at the least, with two leaves set at every joint, somewhat like
other Sage leaves, but smaller, softer, whiter, and rounder, and a
little dented about the edges, and smelling somewhat stronger. At the
tops of the stalks and branches stand the flowers, on a slender like
spike, turning themselves all one way when they blow, and are of a
pale and whitish colour, smaller than Sage, but hooded and gaping like
unto them. The seed is blackish and round; four usually seem in a husk
together: the root is long and stringy, with divers fibres thereat,
and abides many years.

_Place._] It grows in woods, and by wood-sides; as also in divers
fields and bye-lanes in the land.

_Time._] It flowers in June, July, and August.

_Government and virtues._] The herb is under Venus. The decoction of
the Wood Sage provokes urine and women’s courses: It also provokes
sweat, digests humours, and discusses swellings and nodes in the
flesh, and is therefore thought to be good against the French pox.
The decoction of the green herb, made with wine, is a safe and sure
remedy for those who by falls, bruises, or blows, suspect some vein
to be inwardly broken, to disperse and void the congealed blood, and
to consolidate the veins. The drink used inwardly, and the herb used
outwardly, is good for such as are inwardly or outwardly bursten, and
is found to be a sure remedy for the palsy. The juice of the herb,
or the powder thereof dried, is good for moist ulcers and sores in
the legs, and other parts, to dry them, and cause them to heal more
speedily. It is no less effectual also in green wounds, to be used upon
any occasion.


    SOLOMON’S SEAL.

_Descript._] THE common Solomon’s Seal rises up with a round stalk half
a yard high, bowing or bending down to the ground, set with single
leaves one above another, somewhat large, and like the leaves of the
lily-convally, or May-lily, with an eye of bluish upon the green,
with some ribs therein, and more yellowish underneath. At the foot of
every leaf, almost from the bottom up to the top of the stalk, come
forth small, long, white and hollow pendulous flowers, somewhat like
the flowers of May-lily, but ending in five long points, for the most
part two together, at the end of a long foot-stalk, and sometimes but
one, and sometimes also two stalks, and flowers at the foot of a leaf,
which are without any scent at all, and stand on the top of the stalk.
After they are past, come in their places small round berries great at
the first, and blackish green, tending to blueness when they are ripe,
wherein lie small, white, hard, and stony seeds. The root is of the
thickness of one’s finger or thumb, white and knotted in some places, a
flat round circle representing a Seal, whereof it took the name, lying
along under the upper crust of the earth, and not growing downward, but
with many fibres underneath.

_Place._] It is frequent in divers places of this land; as, namely
in a wood two miles from Canterbury, by Fish-Pool Hill, as also in
Bushy Close belonging to the parsonage of Alderbury, near Clarendon,
two miles from Salisbury: in Cheffon wood, on Chesson Hill, between
Newington and Sittingbourn in Kent, and divers other places in Essex,
and other counties.

_Time._] It flowers about May: The root abides and shoots a-new every
year.

_Government and virtues._] Saturn owns the plant, for he loves his
bones well. The root of Solomon’s Seal is found by experience to be
available in wounds, hurts, and outward sores, to heal and close up the
lips of those that are green, and to dry up and restrain the flux of
humours to those that are old. It is singularly good to stay vomitings
and bleeding wheresoever, as also all fluxes in man or woman; also,
to knit any joint, which by weakness uses to be often out of place,
or will not stay in long when it is set; also to knit and join broken
bones in any part of the body, the roots being bruised and applied to
the places; yea, it hath been found by experience, and the decoction
of the root in wine, or the bruised root put into wine or other
drink, and after a night’s infusion, strained forth hard and drank,
hath helped both man and beast, whose bones hath been broken by any
occasion, which is the most assured refuge of help to people of divers
counties of the land that they can have. It is no less effectual to
help ruptures and burstings, the decoction in wine, or the powder in
broth or drink, being inwardly taken, and outwardly applied to the
place. The same is also available for inward or outward bruises, falls
or blows, both to dispel the congealed blood, and to take away both the
pains and the black and blue marks that abide after the hurt. The same
also, or the distilled water of the whole plant, used to the face, or
other parts of the skin, cleanses it from morphew, freckles, spots, or
marks whatsoever, leaving the place fresh, fair, and lovely; for which
purpose it is much used by the Italian Dames.


    SAMPHIRE.

_Descript._] ROCK Samphire grows up with a tender green stalk about
half a yard, or two feet high at the most, branching forth almost
from the very bottom, and stored with sundry thick and almost round
(somewhat long) leaves of a deep green colour, sometimes two together,
and sometimes more on a stalk, and sappy, and of a pleasant, hot, and
spicy taste. At the top of the stalks and branches stand umbels of
white flowers, and after them come large seed, bigger than fennel seed,
yet somewhat like it. The root is great, white, and long, continuing
many years, and is of an hot and spicy taste likewise.

_Place._] It grows on the rocks that are often moistened at the least,
if not overflowed with the sea water.

_Time._] And it flowers and seeds in the end of July and August.

_Government and virtues._] It is an herb of Jupiter, and was in former
times wont to be used more than now it is; the more is the pity. It is
well known almost to every body, that ill digestions and obstructions
are the cause of most of the diseases which the frail nature of man
is subject to; both which might be remedied by a more frequent use of
this herb. If people would have sauce to their meat, they may take some
for profit as well as for pleasure. It is a safe herb, very pleasant
both to taste and stomach, helps digestion, and in some sort opening
obstructions of the liver and spleen: provokes urine, and helps thereby
to wash away the gravel and stone engendered in the kidneys or bladder.


    SANICLE.

THIS herb is by many called Butter-wort.

_Descript._] Ordinary Sanicle sends forth many great round leaves,
standing upon long brownish stalks, every one somewhat deeply cut or
divided into five or six parts, and some of these also cut in somewhat
like the leaf of crow’s-foot, or dove’s-foot, and finely dented about
the edges, smooth, and of a dark shining colour, and somewhat reddish
about the brims; from among which arise up small, round green stalks,
without any joint or leaf thereon, saving at the top, where it branches
forth into flowers, having a leaf divided into three or four parts at
that joint with the flowers, which are small and white, starting out of
small round greenish yellow heads, many standing together in a tuft,
in which afterwards are the seeds contained, which are small round
burs, somewhat like the leaves of clevers, and stick in the same manner
upon any thing that they touch. The root is composed of many blackish
strings or fibres, set together at a little long head, which abides
with green leaves all the Winter, and perishes not.

_Place._] It is found in many shadowy woods, and other places of this
land.

_Time._] It flowers in June, and the seed is ripe shortly after.

_Government and virtues._] This is one of Venus’s herbs, to cure the
wounds or mischiefs Mars inflicts upon the body of man. It heals green
wounds speedily, or any ulcers, imposthumes, or bleedings inward, also
tumours in any part of the body; for the decoction or powder in drink
taken, and the juice used outwardly, dissipates the humours: and there
is not found any herb that can give such present help either to man
or beast, when the disease falleth upon the lungs or throat, and to
heal up putrid malignant ulcers in the mouth, throat, and privities,
by gargling or washing with the decoction of the leaves and roots made
in water, and a little honey put thereto. It helps to stay women’s
courses, and all other fluxes of blood, either by the mouth, urine, or
stool, and lasks of the belly; the ulcerations of the kidneys also, and
the pains in the bowels, and gonorrhea, being boiled in wine or water,
and drank. The same also is no less powerful to help any ruptures or
burstings, used both inwardly and outwardly: And briefly, it is as
effectual in binding, restraining, consolidating, heating, drying and
healing, as comfrey, bugle, self-heal, or any other of the vulnerary
herbs whatsoever.


    SARACEN’S CONFOUND, OR SARACEN’S
    WOUNDWORT.

_Descript._] THIS grows sometimes, with brownish stalks, and other
whiles with green, to a man’s height, having narrow green leaves
snipped about the edges, somewhat like those of the peach-tree, or
willow leaves, but not of such a white green colour. The tops of the
stalks are furnished with many yellow star-like flowers, standing in
green heads, which when they are fallen, and the seed ripe, which
is somewhat long, small and of a brown colour, wrapped in down, is
therefore carried away with the wind. The root is composed of fibres
set together at a head, which perishes not in Winter, although the
stalks dry away and no leaf appears in the Winter. The taste hereof is
strong and unpleasant; and so is the smell also.

_Place._] It grows in moist and wet grounds, by wood-sides, and
sometimes in moist places of shadowy groves, as also by the water side.

_Time._] It flowers in July, and the seed is soon ripe, and carried
away with the wind.

_Government and virtues._] Saturn owns the herb, and it is of a sober
condition, like him. Among the Germans, this wound herb is preferred
before all others of the same quality. Being boiled in wine, and drank,
it helps the indisposition of the liver, and freeth the gall from
obstructions; whereby it is good for the yellow jaundice and for the
dropsy in the beginning of it; for all inward ulcers of the reins,
mouth or throat, and inward wounds and bruises, likewise for such sores
as happen in the privy parts of men and women; being steeped in wine,
and then distilled, the water thereof drank, is singularly good to
ease all gnawings in the stomach, or other pains of the body, as also
the pains of the mother: and being boiled in water, it helps continual
agues; and the said water, or the simple water of the herb distilled,
or the juice or decoction, are very effectual to heal any green wound,
or old sore or ulcer whatsoever, cleansing them from corruption, and
quickly healing them up: Briefly, whatsoever hath been said of bugle or
sanicle, may be found herein.


    SAUCE-ALONE, OR JACK-BY-THE-HEDGE-SIDE.

_Descript._] THE lower leaves of this are rounder than those that grow
towards the top of the stalks, and are set singly on a joint being
somewhat round and broad, pointed at the ends, dented also about the
edges, somewhat resembling nettle leaves for the form, but of a fresher
green colour, not rough or pricking: The flowers are white, growing
at the top of the stalks one above another, which being past, follow
small round pods, wherein are contained round seed somewhat blackish.
The root stringy and thready, perishes every year after it hath given
seed, and raises itself again of its own sowing. The plant, or any part
thereof, being bruised, smells of garlic, but more pleasantly, and
tastes somewhat hot and sharp, almost like unto rocket.

_Place._] It grows under walls, and by hedge-sides, and path-ways in
fields in many places.

_Time._] It flowers in June, July, and August.

_Government and virtues._] It is an herb of Mercury. This is eaten by
many country people as sauce to their salt fish, and helps well to
digest the crudities and other corrupt humours engendered thereby. It
warms also the stomach, and causes digestion. The juice thereof boiled
with honey is accounted to be as good as hedge mustard for the cough,
to cut and expectorate the tough phlegm. The seed bruised and boiled
in wine, is a singularly good remedy for the wind colic, or the stone,
being drank warm: It is also given to women troubled with the mother,
both to drink, and the seed put into a cloth, and applied while it is
warm, is of singularly good use. The leaves also, or the seed boiled,
is good to be used in clysters to ease the pains of the stone. The
green leaves are held to be good to heal the ulcers in the legs.


    WINTER AND SUMMER SAVOURY.

BOTH these are so well known (being entertained as constant inhabitants
in our gardens) that they need no description.

_Government and virtues._] Mercury claims dominion over this herb,
neither is there a better remedy against the colic and iliac passion,
than this herb; keep it dry by you all the year, if you love yourself
and your ease, and it is a hundred pounds to a penny if you do not;
keep it dry, make conserves and syrups of it for your use, and withal,
take notice that the Summer kind is the best. They are both of them
hot and dry, especially the Summer kind, which is both sharp and quick
in taste, expelling wind in the stomach and bowels, and is a present
help for the rising of the mother procured by wind; provokes urine and
women’s courses, and is much commended for women with child to take
inwardly, and to smell often unto. It cures tough phlegm in the chest
and lungs, and helps to expectorate it the more easily; quickens the
dull spirits in the lethargy, the juice thereof being snuffed up into
the nostrils. The juice dropped into the eyes, clears a dull sight, if
it proceed of thin cold humours distilled from the brain. The juice
heated with the oil of Roses, and dropped into the ears, eases them
of the noise and singing in them, and of deafness also. Outwardly
applied with wheat flour, in manner of a poultice, it gives ease to
the sciatica and palsied members, heating and warming them, and takes
away their pains. It also takes away the pain that comes by stinging of
bees, wasps, &c.


    SAVINE.

TO describe a plant so well known is needless, it being nursed up
almost in every garden, and abides green all the Winter.

_Government and virtues._] It is under the dominion of Mars, being hot
and dry in the third degree, and being of exceeding clean parts, is of
a very digesting quality. If you dry the herb into powder, and mix it
with honey, it is an excellent remedy to cleanse old filthy ulcers and
fistulas; but it hinders them from healing. The same is excellently
good to break carbuncles and plague-sores; also helps the king’s evil,
being applied to the place. Being spread over a piece of leather, and
applied to the navel, kills the worms in the belly, helps scabs and
itch, running sores, cankers, tetters, and ringworms; and being applied
to the place, may haply cure venereal sores. This I thought good to
speak of, as it may be safely used outwardly, for inwardly it cannot be
taken without manifest danger.


    THE COMMON WHITE SAXIFRAGE.

_Descript._] THIS hath a few small reddish kernels of roots covered
with some skins, lying among divers small blackish fibres, which
send forth divers round, faint or yellow green leaves, and greyish
underneath, lying above the grounds, unevenly dented about the edges,
and somewhat hairy, every one upon a little foot-stalk, from whence
rises up round, brownish, hairy, green stalks, two or three feet
high, with a few such like round leaves as grow below, but smaller,
and somewhat branched at the top, whereon stand pretty large white
flowers of five leaves a-piece, with some yellow threads in the middle,
standing in a long crested, brownish green husk. After the flowers are
past, there arises sometimes a round hard head, forked at the top,
wherein is contained small black seed, but usually they fall away
without any seed, and it is the kernels or grains of the root which are
usually called the White Saxifrage-seed, and so used.

_Place._] It grows in many places of our land, as well in the
lower-most, as in the upper dry corners of meadows, and grassy sandy
places. It used to grow near Lamb’s conduit, on the backside of Gray’s
Inn.

_Time._] It flowers in May, and then gathered, as well for that which
is called the seed, as to distil, for it quickly perishes down to the
ground when any hot weather comes.

_Government and virtues._] It is very effectual to cleanse the reins
and bladder, and to dissolve the stone engendered in them, and to
expel it and the gravel by urine; to help the stranguary; for which
purpose the decoction of the herb or roots in white wine, is most
usual, or the powder of the small kernelly root, which is called the
seed, taken in white wine, or in the same decoction made with white
wine, is most usual. The distilled water of the whole herb, root
and flowers, is most familiar to be taken. It provokes also women’s
courses, and frees and cleanses the stomach and lungs from thick and
tough phlegm that trouble them. There are not many better medicines to
break the stone than this.


    BURNET SAXIFRAGE.

_Descript._] THE greater sort of our English Burnet Saxifrage grows
up with divers long stalks of winged leaves, set directly opposite
one to another on both sides, each being somewhat broad, and a little
pointed and dented about the edges, of a sad green colour. At the top
of the stalks stand umbels of white flowers, after which come small and
blackish seed. The root is long and whitish, abiding long. Our lesser
Burnet Saxifrage hath much finer leaves than the former, and very
small, and set one against another, deeply jagged about the edges, and
of the same colour as the former. The umbels of the flowers are white,
and the seed very small, and so is the root, being also somewhat hot
and quick in taste.

_Place._] These grow in moist meadows of this land, and are easy to be
found being well sought for among the grass, wherein many times they
lay hid scarcely to be discerned.

_Time._] They flower about July, and their seed is ripe in August.

_Government and virtues._] They are both of them herbs of the Moon.
The Saxifrages are hot as pepper; and Tragus saith, by his experience,
that they are wholesome. They have the same properties the parsleys
have, but in provoking urine, and causing the pains thereof, and of
the wind and colic, are much more effectual, the roots or seed being
used either in powder, or in decoctions, or any other way; and likewise
helps the windy pains of the mother, and to procure their courses, and
to break and void the stone in the kidneys, to digest cold, viscous,
and tough phlegm in the stomach, and is an especial remedy against all
kind of venom. Castoreum being boiled in the distilled water thereof,
is singularly good to be given to those that are troubled with cramps
and convulsions. Some do use to make the seeds into comfits (as they do
carraway seeds) which is effectual to all the purposes aforesaid. The
juice of the herb dropped into the most grievous wounds of the head,
dries up their moisture, and heals them quickly. Some women use the
distilled water to take away freckles or spots in the skin or face; and
to drink the same sweetened with sugar for all the purposes aforesaid.


    SCABIOUS, THREE SORTS.

_Descript._] COMMON field Scabious grows up with many hairy, soft,
whitish green leaves, some whereof are very little, if at all jagged
on the edges, others very much rent and torn on the sides, and have
threads in them, which upon breaking may be plainly seen; from among
which rise up divers hairy green stalks, three or four feet high,
with such like hairy green leaves on them, but more deeply and finely
divided and branched forth a little: At the tops thereof, which
are naked and bare of leaves for a good space, stand round heads
of flowers, of a pale blueish colour, set together in a head, the
outermost whereof are larger than the inward, with many threads also
in the middle, somewhat flat at the top, as the head with the seed is
likewise; the root is great, white and thick, growing down deep into
the ground, and abides many years.

There is another sort of Field Scabious different in nothing from the
former, but only it is smaller in all respects.

The Corn Scabious differs little from the first, but that it is greater
in all respects, and the flowers more inclining to purple, and the root
creeps under the upper crust of the earth, and runs not deep into the
ground as the first doth.

_Place._] The first grows more usually in meadows, especially about
London every where.

The second in some of the dry fields about this city, but not so
plentifully as the former.

The third in standing corn, or fallow fields, and the borders of such
like fields.

_Time._] They flower in June and July, and some abide flowering until
it be late in August, and the seed is ripe in the mean time.

There are many other sorts of Scabious, but I take these which I have
here described to be most familiar with us. The virtues of both these
and the rest, being much alike, take them as follow.

_Government and virtues._] Mercury owns the plant. Scabious is very
effectual for all sorts of coughs, shortness of breath, and all other
diseases of the breast and lungs, ripening and digesting cold phlegm,
and other tough humours, voids them forth by coughing and spitting: It
ripens also all sorts of inward ulcers and imposthumes; pleurisy also,
if the decoction of the herb dry or green be made in wine, and drank
for some time together. Four ounces of the clarified juice of Scabious
taken in the morning fasting, with a dram of mithridate, or Venice
treacle, frees the heart from any infection of pestilence, if after the
taking of it the party sweat two hours in bed, and this medicine be
again and again repeated, if need require. The green herb bruised and
applied to any carbuncle or plague sore, is found by certain experience
to dissolve and break it in three hours space. The same decoction also
drank, helps the pains and stitches in the side. The decoction of the
roots taken for forty days together, or a dram of the powder of them
taken at a time in whey, doth (as Matthiolus saith) wonderfully help
those that are troubled with running of spreading scabs, tetters,
ringworms, yea, although they proceed from the French pox, which, he
saith he hath tried by experience. The juice or decoction drank, helps
also scabs and breakings-out of the itch, and the like. The juice also
made up into an ointment and used, is effectual for the same purpose.
The same also heals all inward wounds by the drying, cleansing, and
healing quality therein: And a syrup made of the juice and sugar, is
very effectual to all the purposes aforesaid, and so is the distilled
water of the herb and flowers made in due season, especially to be
used when the green herb is not in force to be taken. The decoction of
the herb and roots outwardly applied, doth wonderfully help all sorts
of hard or cold swellings in any part of the body, is effectual for
shrunk sinews or veins, and heals green wounds, old sores, and ulcers.
The juice of Scabious, made up with the powder of Borax and Samphire,
cleanses the skin of the face, or other parts of the body, not only
from freckles and pimples, but also from morphew and leprosy; the head
washed with the decoction, cleanses it from dandriff, scurf, sores,
itch, and the like, used warm. The herb bruised and applied, doth in
a short time loosen, and draw forth any splinter, broken bone, arrow
head, or other such like thing lying in the flesh.


    SCURVYGRASS.

_Descript._] THE ordinary English Scurvygrass hath many thick flat
leaves, more long than broad, and sometimes longer and narrower;
sometimes also smooth on the edges, and sometimes a little waved;
sometimes plain, smooth and pointed, of a sad green, and sometimes a
blueish colour, every one standing by itself upon a long foot-stalk,
which is brownish or greenish also, from among which arise many slender
stalks, bearing few leaves thereon like the other, but longer and less
for the most part: At the tops whereof grow many whitish flowers,
with yellow threads in the middle, standing about a green head, which
becomes the seed vessel, which will be somewhat flat when it is ripe,
wherein is contained reddish seed, tasting somewhat hot. The root is
made of many white strings, which stick deeply into the mud, wherein it
chiefly delights, yet it will well abide in the more upland and drier
ground, and tastes a little brackish and salt even there, but not so
much as where it hath the salt water to feed upon.

_Place._] It grows all along the Thames sides, both on the Essex and
Kentish shores, from Woolwich round about the sea coasts to Dover,
Portsmouth, and even to Bristol, where it is had in plenty; the other
with round leaves grows in the marshes in Holland, in Lincolnshire, and
other places of Lincolnshire by the sea side.

_Descript._] There is also another sort called Dutch Scurvygrass, which
is most known, and frequent in gardens, which has fresh, green, and
almost round leaves rising from the root, not so thick as the former,
yet in some rich ground, very large, even twice as big as in others,
not dented about the edges, or hollow in the middle, standing on a long
foot-stalk; from among these rise long, slender stalks, higher than
the former, with more white flowers at the tops of them, which turn
into small pods, and smaller brownish seed than the former. The root is
white, small and thready. The taste is nothing salt at all; it hath a
hot, aromatical spicy taste.

_Time._] It flowers in April and May, and gives seed ripe quickly after.

_Government and virtues._] It is an herb of Jupiter. The English Scurvy
grass is more used for the salt taste it bears, which doth somewhat
open and cleanse; but the Dutch Scurvygrass is of better effect, and
chiefly used (if it may be had) by those that have the scurvy, and
is of singular good effect to cleanse the blood, liver, and spleen,
taking the juice in the Spring every morning fasting in a cup of drink.
The decoction is good for the same purpose, and opens obstructions,
evacuating cold, clammy and phlegmatic humours both from the liver and
the spleen, and bringing the body to a more lively colour. The juice
also helps all foul ulcers and sores in the mouth, gargled therewith;
and used outwardly, cleanses the skin from spots, marks, or scars that
happen therein.


    SELF-HEAL.

_Descript._] THE common Self-heal which is called also Prunel,
Carpenter’s Herb, Hook-heal, and Sickle-wort, is a small, low, creeping
herb, having many small, roundish pointed leaves, like leaves of wild
mints, of a dark green colour, without dents on the edges; from among
which rise square hairy stalks, scarce a foot high, which spread
sometimes into branches with small leaves set thereon, up to the top,
where stand brown spiked heads of small brownish leaves like scales and
flowers set together, almost like the heads of Cassidony, which flowers
are gaping, and of a blueish purple, or more pale blue, in some places
sweet, but not so in others. The root consists of many fibres downward,
and spreading strings also whereby it increases. The small stalks, with
the leaves creeping on the ground, shoot forth fibres taking hold on
the ground, whereby it is made a great tuft in a short time.

_Place._] It is found in woods and fields every where.

_Time._] It flowers in May, and sometimes in April.

_Government and virtues._] Here is another herb of Venus, Self-heal,
whereby when you are hurt you may heal yourself: It is a special herb
for inward and outward wounds. Take it inwardly in syrups for inward
wounds: outwardly in unguents, and plaisters for outward. As Self-heal
is like Bugle in form, so also in the qualities and virtues, serving
for all the purposes whereto Bugle is applied to with good success,
either inwardly or outwardly, for inward wounds or ulcers whatsoever
within the body, for bruises or falls, and such like hurts. If it be
accompanied with Bugle, Sanicle, and other the like wound herbs, it
will be more effectual to wash or inject into ulcers in the parts
outwardly. Where there is cause to repress the heat and sharpness of
humours flowing to any sore, ulcers, inflammations, swellings, or the
like, or to stay the fluxes of blood in any wound or part, this is used
with some good success; as also to cleanse the foulness of sores, and
cause them more speedily to be healed. It is an especial remedy for all
green wounds, to solder the lips of them, and to keep the place from
any further inconveniencies. The juice hereof used with oil of roses to
anoint the temples and forehead, is very effectual to remove head ache,
and the same mixed with honey of roses, cleanses and heals all ulcers,
in the mouth, and throat, and those also in the secret parts. And the
proverb of the Germans, French, and others, is verified in this, _That
he needs neither physician nor surgeon that hath _Self-heal_ and
_Sanicle_ to help himself_.


    THE SERVICE-TREE.

IT is so well known in the place where it grows, that it needs no
description.

_Time._] It flowers before the end of May, and the fruit is ripe in
October.

_Government and virtues._] Services, when they are mellow, are fit to
be taken to stay fluxes, scouring, and casting, yet less than medlers.
If they be dried before they be mellow, and kept all the year, they
may be used in decoctions for the said purpose, either to drink, or to
bathe the parts requiring it; and are profitably used in that manner to
stay the bleeding of wounds, and of the mouth or nose, to be applied to
the forehead and nape of the neck; and are under the dominion of Saturn.


    SHEPHERD’S PURSE.

IT is called Whoreman’s Permacety, Shepherd’s Scrip, Shepherd’s Pounce,
Toy-wort, Pickpurse, and Casewort.

_Descript._] The root is small, white, and perishes every year. The
leaves are small and long, of a pale green colour, and deeply cut in
on both sides, among which spring up a stalk which is small and round,
containing small leaves upon it even to the top. The flowers are white
and very small; after which come the little cases which hold the seed,
which are flat, almost in the form of a heart.

_Place._] They are frequent in this nation, almost by every path-side.

_Time._] They flower all the Summer long; nay some of them are so
fruitful, that they flower twice a year.

_Government and virtues._] It is under the dominion of Saturn, and of
a cold, dry, and binding nature, like to him. It helps all fluxes of
blood, either caused by inward or outward wounds; as also flux of the
belly, and bloody flux, spitting blood, and bloody urine, stops the
terms in women; being bound to the wrists of the hands, and the soles
of the feet, it helps the yellow jaundice. The herb being made into a
poultice, helps inflammations and St. Anthony’s fire. The juice being
dropped into the ears, heals the pains, noise, and mutterings thereof.
A good ointment may be made of it for all wounds, especially wounds in
the head.


    SMALLAGE.

THIS is also very well known, and therefore I shall not trouble the
reader with any description thereof.

_Place._] It grows naturally in dry and marshy ground; but if it be
sown in gardens, it there prospers very well.

_Time._] It abides green all the Winter, and seeds in August.

_Government and virtues._] It is an herb of Mercury. Smallage is
hotter, drier, and much more medicinal than parsley, for it much more
opens obstructions of the liver and spleen, rarefies thick phlegm,
and cleanses it and the blood withal. It provokes urine and women’s
courses, and is singularly good against the yellow jaundice, tertian
and quartan agues, if the juice thereof be taken, but especially
made up into a syrup. The juice also put to honey of roses, and
barley-water, is very good to gargle the mouth and throat of those
that have sores and ulcers in them, and will quickly heal them. The
same lotion also cleanses and heals all other foul ulcers and cankers
elsewhere, if they be washed therewith. The seed is especially used to
break and expel wind, to kill worms, and to help a stinking breath.
The root is effectual to all the purposes aforesaid, and is held
to be stronger in operation than the herb, but especially to open
obstructions, and to rid away any ague, if the juice thereof be taken
in wine, or the decoction thereof in wine used.


    SOPEWORT, OR BRUISEWORT.

_Descript._] THE roots creep under ground far and near, with many
joints therein, of a brown colour on the outside and yellowish within,
shooting forth in divers places weak round stalks, full of joints, set
with two leaves a-piece at every one of them on a contrary side, which
are ribbed somewhat like to plantain, and fashioned like the common
field white campion leaves, seldom having any branches from the sides
of the stalks, but set with flowers at the top, standing in long husks
like the wild campions, made of five leaves a-piece, round at the ends,
and dented in the middle, of a rose colour, almost white, sometimes
deeper, sometimes paler; of a reasonable scent.

_Place._] It grows wild in many low and wet grounds of this land, by
brooks and the sides of running waters.

_Time._] It flowers usually in July, and so continues all August, and
part of September, before they be quite spent.

_Government and virtues._] Venus owns it. The country people in divers
places do use to bruise the leaves of Sopewort, and lay it to their
fingers, hands or legs, when they are cut, to heal them up again. Some
make great boast thereof, that it is diuretical to provoke urine, and
thereby to expel gravel and the stone in the reins or kidneys, and do
also account it singularly good to void hydropical waters: and they no
less extol it to perform an absolute cure in the French pox, more than
either sarsaparilla, guiacum, or China can do; which, how true it is, I
leave others to judge.


    SORREL.

OUR ordinary Sorrel, which grows in gardens, and also wild in the
fields, is so well known, that it needs no description.

_Government and virtues._] It is under the dominion of Venus. Sorrel
is prevalent in all hot diseases, to cool any inflammation and heat
of blood in agues pestilential or choleric, or sickness and fainting,
arising from heat, and to refresh the overspent spirits with the
violence of furious or fiery fits of agues; to quench thirst, and
procure an appetite in fainting or decaying stomachs: For it resists
the putrefaction of the blood, kills worms, and is a cordial to the
heart, which the seed doth more effectually, being more drying and
binding, and thereby stays the hot fluxes of women’s courses, or of
humours in the bloody flux, or flux of the stomach. The root also in a
decoction, or in powder, is effectual for all the said purposes. Both
roots and seeds, as well as the herb, are held powerful to resist the
poison of the scorpion. The decoction of the roots is taken to help
the jaundice, and to expel the gravel and the stone in the reins or
kidneys. The decoction of the flowers made with wine and drank, helps
the black jaundice, as also the inward ulcers of the body and bowels. A
syrup made with the juice of Sorrel and fumitory, is a sovereign help
to kill those sharp humours that cause the itch. The juice thereof,
with a little vinegar, serves well to be used outwardly for the same
cause, and is also profitable for tetters, ringworms, &c. It helps also
to discuss the kernels in the throat; and the juice gargled in the
mouth, helps the sores therein. The leaves wrapt in a colewort leaf and
roasted in the embers, and applied to a hard imposthume, botch, boil,
or plague sore, doth both ripen and break it. The distilled water of
the herb is of much good use for all the purposes aforesaid.


    WOOD SORREL.

_Descript._] THIS grows upon the ground, having a number of leaves
coming from the root made of three leaves, like a trefoil, but broad
at the ends, and cut in the middle, of a yellowish green colour, every
one standing on a long foot-stalk, which at their first coming up are
close folded together to the stalk, but opening themselves afterwards,
and are of a fine sour relish, and yielding a juice which will turn
red when it is clarified, and makes a most dainty clear syrup. Among
these leaves rise up divers slender, weak foot-stalks, with every one
of them a flower at the top, consisting of five small pointed leaves,
star-fashion, of a white colour, in most places, and in some dashed
over with a small show of blueish, on the back side only. After the
flowers are past, follow small round heads, with small yellowish seed
in them. The roots are nothing but small strings fastened to the end of
a small long piece; all of them being of a yellowish colour.

_Place._] It grows in many places of our land, in woods and wood-sides,
where they be moist and shadowed, and in other places not too much upon
the Sun.

_Time._] It flowers in April and May.

_Government and virtues._] Venus owns it. Wood Sorrel serves to all the
purposes that the other Sorrels do, and is more effectual in hindering
putrefaction of blood, and ulcers in the mouth and body, and to quench
thirst, to strengthen a weak stomach, to procure an appetite, to stay
vomiting, and very excellent in any contagious sickness or pestilential
fevers. The syrup made of the juice, is effectual in all the cases
aforesaid, and so is the distilled water of the herb. Sponges or linen
cloths wet in the juice and applied outwardly to any hot swelling or
inflammations, doth much cool and help them. The same juice taken
and gargled in the mouth, and after it is spit forth, taken afresh,
doth wonderfully help a foul stinking canker or ulcer therein. It is
singularly good to heal wounds, or to stay the bleeding of thrusts or
scabs in the body.


    SOW THISTLE.

SOW Thistles are generally so well known, that they need no description.

_Place._] They grow in gardens and manured grounds, sometimes by old
walls, pathsides of fields, and high ways.

_Government and virtues._] This and the former are under the influence
of Venus. Sow Thistles are cooling, and somewhat binding, and are very
fit to cool a hot stomach, and ease the pains thereof. The herb boiled
in wine, is very helpful to stay the dissolution of the stomach, and
the milk that is taken from the stalks when they are broken, given
in drink, is beneficial to those that are short winded, and have a
wheezing. Pliny saith, That it hath caused the gravel and stone to be
voided by urine, and that the eating thereof helps a stinking breath.
The decoction of the leaves and stalks causes abundance of milk in
nurses, and their children to be well coloured. The juice or distilled
water is good for all hot inflammations, wheals, and eruptions or heat
in the skin, itching of the hæmorrhoids. The juice boiled or thoroughly
heated in a little oil of bitter almonds in the peel of a pomegranate,
and dropped into the ears, is a sure remedy for deafness, singings,
&c. Three spoonfuls of the juice taken, warmed in white wine, and some
wine put thereto, causes women in travail to have so easy and speedy
a delivery, that they may be able to walk presently after. It is
wonderful good for women to wash their faces with, to clear the skin,
and give it a lustre.


    SOUTHERN WOOD.

SOUTHERN Wood is so well known to be an ordinary inhabitant in our
gardens, that I shall not need to trouble you with any description
thereof.

_Time._] It flowers for the most part in July and August.

_Government and virtues._] It is a gallant mercurial plant, worthy of
more esteem than it hath. Dioscorides saith, That the seed bruised,
heated in warm water, and drank, helps those that are bursten, or
troubled with cramps or convulsions of the sinews, the sciatica, or
difficulty in making water, and bringing down women’s courses. The same
taken in wine is an antidote, or counter-poison against all deadly
poison, and drives away serpents and other venomous creatures; as also
the smell of the herb, being burnt, doth the same. The oil thereof
anointed on the back-bone before the fits of agues come, takes them
away: It takes away inflammations in the eyes, if it be put with some
part of a roasted quince, and boiled with a few crumbs of bread, and
applied. Boiled with barley-meal it takes away pimples, pushes or
wheals that arise in the face, or other parts of the body. The seed as
well as the dried herb, is often given to kill the worms in children:
The herb bruised and laid to, helps to draw forth splinters and thorns
out of the flesh. The ashes thereof dries up and heals old ulcers,
that are without inflammation, although by the sharpness thereof it
bites sore, and puts them to sore pains; as also the sores in the privy
parts of man or woman. The ashes mingled with old sallad oil, helps
those that have hair fallen, and are bald, causing the hair to grow
again either on the head or beard. Daranters saith, That the oil made
of Southern-wood, and put among the ointments that are used against
the French disease, is very effectual, and likewise kills lice in the
head. The distilled water of the herb is said to help them much that
are troubled with the stone, as also for the diseases of the spleen and
mother. The Germans commend it for a singular wound herb, and therefore
call it Stabwort. It is held by all writers, ancient and modern, to be
more offensive to the stomach than worm-wood.


    SPIGNEL, OR SPIKENARD.

_Descript._] THE roots of common Spignel do spread much and deep in
the ground, many strings or branches growing from one head, which is
hairy at the top, of a blackish brown colour on the outside, and white
within, smelling well, and of an aromatical taste from whence rise
sundry long stalks of most fine cut leaves like hair, smaller than
dill, set thick on both sides of the stalks, and of a good scent. Among
these leaves rise up round stiff stalks, with a few joints and leaves
on them, and at the tops an umbel of pure white flowers; at the edges
whereof sometimes will be seen a shew of the reddish blueish colour,
especially before they be full blown, and are succeeded by small,
somewhat round seeds, bigger than the ordinary fennel, and of a brown
colour, divided into two parts, and crusted on the back, as most of the
umbelliferous seeds are.

_Place._] It grows wild in Lancashire, Yorkshire, and other northern
counties, and is also planted in gardens.

_Government and virtues._] It is an herb of Venus. Galen saith, The
roots of Spignel are available to provoke urine, and women’s courses;
but if too much thereof be taken, it causes head-ache. The roots
boiled in wine or water, and drank, helps the stranguary and stoppings
of the urine, the wind, swellings and pains in the stomach, pains of
the mother, and all joint-aches. If the powder of the root be mixed
with honey, and the same taken as a licking medicine, it breaks tough
phlegm, and dries up the rheum that falls on the lungs. The roots are
accounted very effectual against the stinging or biting of any venomous
creature.


    SPLEENWORT, CETERACH, OR HEART’S
    TONGUE.

_Descript._] THE smooth Spleenwort, from a black, thready and bushy
root, sends forth many long single leaves, cut in on both sides into
round dents almost to the middle, which is not so hard as that of
polypody, each division being not always set opposite unto the other,
cut between each, smooth, and of a light green on the upper side, and a
dark yellowish roughness on the back, folding or rolling itself inward
at the first springing up.

_Place._] It grows as well upon stone walls, as moist and shadowy
places, about Bristol, and other west parts plentifully; as also on
Framlingham Castle, on Beaconsfield church in Berkshire, at Stroud in
Kent, and elsewhere, and abides green all the Winter.

_Government and virtues._] Saturn owns it. It is generally used against
infirmities of the Spleen: It helps the stranguary, and wasteth the
stone in the bladder, and is good against the yellow jaundice and the
hiccough; but the juice of it in women hinders conception. Matthiolus
saith, That if a dram of the dust that is on the backside of the leaves
be mixed with half a dram of amber in powder, and taken with the juice
of purslain or plantain, it helps the gonorrhea speedily, and that the
herb and root being boiled and taken, helps all melancholy diseases,
and those especially that arise from the French diseases. Camerarius
saith, That the distilled water thereof being drank, is very effectual
against the stone in the reins and bladder; and that the lye that is
made of the ashes thereof being drank for some time together, helps
splenetic persons. It is used in outward remedies for the same purpose.


    STAR THISTLE.

_Descript._] A COMMON Star Thistle has divers narrow leaves lying next
the ground, cut on the edges somewhat deeply into many parts, soft
or a little wooly, all over green, among which rise up divers weak
stalks, parted into many branches: all lying down to the ground, that
it seems a pretty bush, set with divers the like divided leaves up to
the tops, where severally do stand small whitish green heads, set with
sharp white pricks (no part of the plant else being prickly) which
are somewhat yellowish; out of the middle whereof rises the flowers,
composed of many small reddish purple threads; and in the heads, after
the flowers are past, come small whitish round seed, lying down as
others do. The root is small, long and woody, perishing every year, and
rising again of its own sowing.

_Place._] It grows wild in the fields about London in many places, as
at Mile-End green, and many other places.

_Time._] It flowers early, and seeds in July, and sometimes in August.

_Government and virtues._] This, as almost all Thistles are, is under
Mars. The seed of this Star Thistle made into powder, and drank in
wine, provokes urine, and helps to break the stone, and drives it
forth. The root in powder, and given in wine and drank, is good against
the plague and pestilence; and drank in the morning fasting for some
time together, it is very profitable for fistulas in any part of the
body. Baptista Sardas doth much commend the distilled water thereof,
being drank, to help the French disease, to open the obstructions
of the liver, and cleanse the blood from corrupted humours, and is
profitable against the quotidian or tertian ague.


    STRAWBERRIES.

THESE are so well known through this land, that they need no
description.

_Time._] They flower in May ordinarily, and the fruit is ripe shortly
after.

_Government and virtues._] Venus owns the herb. Strawberries, when they
are green, are cool and dry; but when they are ripe, they are cool and
moist: The berries are excellently good to cool the liver, the blood,
and the spleen, or an hot choleric stomach; to refresh and comfort
the fainting spirits, and quench thirst: They are good also for other
inflammations; yet it is not amiss to refrain from them in a fever,
lest by their putrifying in the stomach they increase the fits. The
leaves and roots boiled in wine and water, and drank, do likewise cool
the liver and blood, and assuage all inflammations in the reins and
bladder, provoke urine, and allay the heat and sharpness thereof. The
same also being drank stays the bloody flux and women’s courses, and
helps the swelling of the spleen. The water of the Berries carefully
distilled, is a sovereign remedy and cordial in the panting and beating
of the heart, and is good for the yellow jaundice. The juice dropped
into foul ulcers, or they washed therewith, or the decoction of the
herb and root, doth wonderfully cleanse and help to cure them. Lotions
and gargles for sore mouths, or ulcers therein, or in the privy parts
or elsewhere, are made with the leaves and roots thereof; which is also
good to fasten loose teeth, and to heal spungy foul gums. It helps also
to stay catarrhs, or defluctions of rheum in the mouth, throat, teeth,
or eyes. The juice or water is singularly good for hot and red inflamed
eyes, if dropped into them, or they bathed therewith. It is also of
excellent property for all pushes, wheals and other breakings forth of
hot and sharp humours in the face and hands, and other parts of the
body, to bathe them therewith, and to take away any redness in the
face, or spots, or other deformities in the skin, and to make it clear
and smooth. Some use this medicine, Take so many Strawberries as you
shall think fitting, and put them into a distillatory, or body of glass
fit for them, which being well closed, set it in a bed of horse dung
for your use. It is an excellent water for hot inflamed eyes, and to
take away a film or skin that begins to grow over them, and for such
other defects in them as may be helped by any outward medicine.


    SUCCORY, OR CHICORY.

_Descript._] THE garden Succory hath long and narrower leaves than the
Endive, and more cut in or torn on the edges, and the root abides many
years. It bears also blue flowers like Endive, and the seed is hardly
distinguished from the seed of the smooth or ordinary Endive.

The wild Succory hath divers long leaves lying on the ground, very much
cut in or torn on the edges, on both sides, even to the middle rib,
ending in a point; sometimes it hath a rib down to the middle of the
leaves, from among which rises up a hard, round, woody stalk, spreading
into many branches, set with smaller and less divided leaves on them up
to the tops, where stand the flowers, which are like the garden kind,
and the seed is also (only take notice that the flowers of the garden
kind are gone in on a sunny day, they being so cold, that they are not
able to endure the beams of the sun, and therefore more delight in the
shade) the root is white, but more hard and woody than the garden kind.
The whole plant is exceedingly bitter.

_Place._] This grows in many places of our land in waste untilled and
barren fields. The other only in gardens.

_Government and virtues._] It is an herb of Jupiter. Garden Succory,
as it is more dry and less cold than Endive, so it opens more. An
handful of the leaves, or roots boiled in wine or water, and a draught
thereof drank fasting, drives forth choleric and phlegmatic humours,
opens obstructions of the liver, gall and spleen; helps the yellow
jaundice, the heat of the reins, and of the urine; the dropsy also;
and those that have an evil disposition in their bodies, by reason
of long sickness, evil diet, &c. which the Greeks call Cachexia. A
decoction thereof made with wine, and drank, is very effectual against
long lingering agues; and a dram of the seed in powder, drank in wine,
before the fit of the ague, helps to drive it away. The distilled water
of the herb and flowers (if you can take them in time) hath the like
properties, and is especially good for hot stomachs, and in agues,
either pestilential or of long continuance; for swoonings and passions
of the heart, for the heat and head-ache in children, and for the blood
and liver. The said water, or the juice, or the bruised leaves applied
outwardly, allay swellings, inflammations, St. Anthony’s fire, pushes,
wheals, and pimples, especially used with a little vinegar; as also to
wash pestiferous sores. The said water is very effectual for sore eyes
that are inflamed with redness, for nurses’ breasts that are pained by
the abundance of milk.

The wild Succory, as it is more bitter, so it is more strengthening to
the stomach and liver.


    STONE-CROP, PRICK-MADAM, OR SMALL-HOUSELEEK.

_Descript._] IT grows with divers trailing branches upon the ground,
set with many thick, flat, roundish, whitish green leaves, pointed at
the ends. The flowers stand many of them together, somewhat loosely.
The roots are small, and run creeping under ground.

_Place._] It grows upon the stone walls and mud walls, upon the tiles
of houses and pent-houses, and amongst rubbish, and in other gravelly
places.

_Time._] It flowers in June and July, and the leaves are green all the
Winter.

_Government and virtues._] It is under the dominion of the Moon,
cold in quality, and something binding, and therefore very good to
stay defluctions, especially such as fall upon the eyes. It stops
bleeding, both inward and outward, helps cankers, and all fretting
sores and ulcers; it abates the heat of choler, thereby preventing
diseases arising from choleric humours. It expels poison much, resists
pestilential fevers, being exceeding good also for tertian agues: You
may drink the decoction of it, if you please, for all the foregoing
infirmities. It is so harmless an herb, you can scarce use it amiss:
Being bruised and applied to the place, it helps the king’s evil, and
any other knots or kernels in the flesh; as also the piles.


    ENGLISH TOBACCO.

_Descript._] THIS rises up with a round thick stalk, about two feet
high, whereon do grow thick, flat green leaves, nothing so large as
the other Indian kind, somewhat round pointed also, and nothing dented
about the edges. The stalk branches forth, and bears at the tops divers
flowers set on great husks like the other, but nothing so large: scarce
standing above the brims of the husks, round pointed also, and of a
greenish yellow colour. The seed that follows is not so bright, but
larger, contained in the like great heads. The roots are neither so
great nor woody; it perishes every year with the hard frosts in Winter,
but rises generally from its own sowing.

_Place._] This came from some parts of Brazil, as it is thought, and is
more familiar in our country than any of the other sorts; early giving
ripe seed, which the others seldom do.

_Time._] It flowers from June, sometimes to the end of August, or
later, and the seed ripens in the mean time.

_Government and virtues._] It is a martial plant. It is found by
good experience to be available to expectorate tough phlegm from the
stomach, chest, and lungs. The juice thereof made into a syrup, or the
distilled water of the herb drank with some sugar, or without, if you
will, or the smoak taken by a pipe, as is usual, but fainting, helps
to expel worms in the stomach and belly, and to ease the pains in the
head, or megrim, and the griping pains in the bowels. It is profitable
for those that are troubled with the stone in the kidneys, both to
ease the pains by provoking urine, and also to expel gravel and the
stone engendered therein, and hath been found very effectual to expel
windiness, and other humours, which cause the strangling of the mother.
The seed hereof is very effectual to expel the tooth ache, and the
ashes of the burnt herb to cleanse the gums, and make the teeth white.
The herb bruised and applied to the place grieved with the king’s
evil, helps it in nine or ten days effectually. Monardus saith, it is
a counter poison against the biting of any venomous creature, the herb
also being outwardly applied to the hurt place. The distilled water
is often given with some sugar before the fit of an ague, to lessen
it, and take it away in three or four times using. If the distilled
fæces of the herb, having been bruised before the distillation, and not
distilled dry, be set in warm dung for fourteen days, and afterwards
be hung in a bag in a wine cellar, the liquor that distills therefrom
is singularly good to use in cramps, aches, the gout and sciatica,
and to heal itches, scabs, and running ulcers, cankers, and all foul
sores whatsoever. The juice is also good for all the said griefs, and
likewise to kill lice in children’s heads. The green herb bruised and
applied to any green wounds, cures any fresh wound or cut whatsoever:
and the juice put into old sores, both cleanses and heals them. There
is also made hereof a singularly good salve to help imposthumes, hard
tumours, and other swellings by blows and falls.


    THE TAMARISK TREE.

IT is so well known in the place where it grows, that it needs no
description.

_Time._] It flowers about the end of May, or June, and the seed is
ripe and blown away in the beginning of September.

_Government and virtues._] A gallant Saturnine herb it is. The root,
leaves, young branches, or bark boiled in wine, and drank, stays the
bleeding of the hæmorrhodical veins, the spitting of blood, the too
abounding of women’s courses, the jaundice, the cholic, and the biting
of all venomous serpents, except the asp; and outwardly applied, is
very powerful against the hardness of the spleen, and the tooth-ache,
pains in the ears, red and watering eyes. The decoction, with some
honey put thereto, is good to stay gangrenes and fretting ulcers, and
to wash those that are subject to nits and lice. Alpinus and Veslingius
affirm, That the Egyptians do with good success use the wood of it to
cure the French disease, as others do with lignum vitæ or guiacum; and
give it also to those who have the leprosy, scabs, ulcers, or the like.
Its ashes doth quickly heal blisters raised by burnings or scaldings.
It helps the dropsy, arising from the hardness of the spleen, and
therefore to drink out of cups made of the wood is good for splenetic
persons. It is also helpful for melancholy, and the black jaundice that
arise thereof.


    GARDEN TANSY.

GARDEN Tansy is so well known, that it needs no description.

_Time._] It flowers in June and July.

_Government and virtues._] Dame Venus was minded to pleasure women with
child by this herb, for there grows not an herb, fitter for their use
than this is; it is just as though it were cut out for the purpose.
This herb bruised and applied to the navel, stays miscarriages; I
know no herb like it for that use: Boiled in ordinary beer, and the
decoction drank, doth the like; and if her womb be not as she would
have it, this decoction will make it so. Let those women that desire
children love this herb, it is their best companion, their husbands
excepted. Also it consumes the phlegmatic humours, the cold and
moist constitution of Winter most usually affects the body of man
with, and that was the first reason of eating tansies in the Spring.
The decoction of the common Tansy, or the juice drank in wine, is a
singular remedy for all the griefs that come by slopping of the urine,
helps the stranguary and those that have weak reins and kidneys. It is
also very profitable to dissolve and expel wind in the stomach, belly,
or bowels, to procure women’s courses, and expel windiness in the
matrix, if it be bruised and often smelled unto, as also applied to the
lower part of the belly. It is also very profitable for such women as
are given to miscarry. It is used also against the stone in the reins,
especially to men. The herb fried with eggs (as it is the custom in
the Spring-time) which is called a Tansy, helps to digest and carry
downward those bad humours that trouble the stomach. The seed is very
profitably given to children for the worms, and the juice in drink is
as effectual. Being boiled in oil, it is good for the sinews shrunk by
cramps, or pained with colds, if thereto applied.


    WILD TANSY, OR SILVER WEED.

THIS is also so well known, that it needs no description.

_Place._] It grows in every place.

_Time._] It flowers in June and July.

_Government and virtues._] Now Dame Venus hath fitted women with
two herbs of one name, the one to help conception, and the other to
maintain beauty, and what more can be expected of her? What now remains
for you, but to love your husbands, and not to be wanting to your poor
neighbours? Wild Tansy stays the lask, and all the fluxes of blood in
men and women, which some say it will do, if the green herb be worn in
the shoes, so it be next the skin; and it is true enough, that it will
stop the terms, if worn so, and the whites too, for ought I know. It
stays also spitting or vomiting of blood. The powder of the herb taken
in some of the distilled water, helps the whites in women, but more
especially if a little coral and ivory in powder be put to it. It is
also recommended to help children that are bursten, and have a rupture,
being boiled in water and salt. Being boiled in water and drank, it
eases the griping pains of the bowels, and is good for the sciatica
and joint-aches. The same boiled in vinegar, with honey and allum,
and gargled in the mouth, eases the pains of the tooth-ache, fastens
loose teeth, helps the gums that are sore, and settles the palate of
the mouth in its place, when it is fallen down. It cleanses and heals
ulcers in the mouth, or secret parts, and is very good for inward
wounds, and to close the lips of green wounds, and to heal old, moist,
and corrupt running sores in the legs or elsewhere. Being bruised
and applied to the soles of the feet and hand wrists, it wonderfully
cools the hot fits of agues, be they never so violent. The distilled
water cleanses the skin of all discolourings therein, as morphew,
sun-burnings, &c. as also pimples, freckles, and the like; and dropped
into the eyes, or cloths wet therein and applied, takes away the heat
and inflammations in them.


    THISTLES.

OF these are many kinds growing here in England which are so well
known, that they need no description: Their difference is easily known
on the places where they grow, _viz._

_Place._] Some grow in fields, some in meadows, and some among the
corn; others on heaths, greens, and waste grounds in many places.

_Time._] They flower in June and August and their seed is ripe quickly
after.

_Government and virtues._] Surely Mars rules it, it is such a prickly
business. All these thistles are good to provoke urine, and to mend
the stinking smell thereof; as also the rank smell of the arm-pits, or
the whole body; being boiled in wine and drank, and are said to help a
stinking breath, and to strengthen the stomach. Pliny saith, That the
juice bathed on the place that wants hair, it being fallen off, will
cause it to grow speedily.


    THE MELANCHOLY THISTLE.

_Descript._] IT rises up with tender single hoary green stalks, bearing
thereon four or five green leaves, dented about the edges; the points
thereof are little or nothing prickly, and at the top usually but one
head, yet sometimes from the bosom of the uppermost leaves there shoots
forth another small head, scaly and prickly, with many reddish thrumbs
or threads in the middle, which being gathered fresh, will keep the
colour a long time, and fades not from the stalk a long time, while it
perfects the seed, which is of a mean bigness, lying in the down. The
root hath many strings fastened to the head, or upper part, which is
blackish, and perishes not.

There is another sort little differing from the former, but that the
leaves are more green above, and more hoary underneath, and the stalk
being about two feet high, bears but one scaly head, with threads and
seeds as the former.

_Place._] They grow in many moist meadows of this land, as well in the
southern, as in the northern parts.

_Time._] They flower about July or August, and their seed ripens
quickly after.

_Government and virtues._] It is under Capricorn, and therefore under
both Saturn and Mars, one rids melancholy by sympathy, the other by
antipathy. Their virtues are but few, but those not to be despised; for
the decoction of the thistle in wine being drank, expels superfluous
melancholy out of the body, and makes a man as merry as a cricket;
superfluous melancholy causes care, fear, sadness, despair, envy,
and many evils more besides; but religion teaches to wait upon God’s
providence, and cast our care upon him who cares for us. What a fine
thing were it if men and women could live so? And yet seven years’
care and fear makes a man never the wiser, nor a farthing richer.
Dioscorides saith, the root borne about one doth the like, and removes
all diseases of melancholy. Modern writers laugh at him; _Let them
laugh that win_: my opinion is, that it is the best remedy against all
melancholy diseases that grows; they that please may use it.


    OUR LADY’S THISTLE.

_Descript._] OUR Lady’s Thistle hath divers very large and broad leaves
lying on the ground cut in, and as it were crumpled, but somewhat hairy
on the edges, of a white green shining colour, wherein are many lines
and streaks of a milk white colour, running all over, and set with many
sharp and stiff prickles all about, among which rises up one or more
strong, round, and prickly stalks, set full of the like leaves up to
the top, where at the end of every branch, comes forth a great prickly
Thistle-like head, strongly armed with prickles, and with bright purple
thumbs rising out of the middle; after they are past, the seed grows in
the said heads, lying in soft white down, which is somewhat flattish
in the ground, and many strings and fibres fastened thereunto. All the
whole plant is bitter in taste.

_Place._] It is frequent on the banks of almost every ditch.

_Time._] It flowers and seeds in June, July, and August.

_Government and virtues._] Our Lady’s Thistle is under Jupiter, and
thought to be as effectual as Carduus Benedictus for agues, and to
prevent and cure the infection of the plague: as also to open the
obstructions of the liver and spleen, and thereby is good against the
jaundice. It provokes urine, breaks and expels the stone, and is good
for the dropsy. It is effectual also for the pains in the sides, and
many other inward pains and gripings. The seed and distilled water
is held powerful to all the purposes aforesaid, and besides, it is
often applied both outwardly with cloths or spunges to the region of
the liver, to cool the distemper thereof, and to the region of the
heart, against swoonings and the passions of it. It cleanses the blood
exceedingly: and in Spring, if you please to boil the tender plant (but
cut off the prickles, unless you have a mind to choak yourself) it will
change your blood as the season changes, and that is the way to be safe.


    THE WOOLLEN, OR, COTTON THISTLE.

_Descript._] THIS has many large leaves lying upon the ground, somewhat
cut in, and as it were crumpled on the edges, of a green colour on the
upper side, but covered over with a long hairy wool or cotton down, set
with most sharp and cruel pricks; from the middle of whose heads of
flowers come forth many purplish crimson threads, and sometimes white,
although but seldom. The seed that follow in those white downy heads,
is somewhat large and round, resembling the seed of Lady’s Thistle, but
paler. The root is great and thick, spreading much, yet usually dies
after seed time.

_Place._] It grows on divers ditch-banks, and in the corn-fields,
and highways, generally throughout the land, and is often growing in
gardens.

_Government and virtues._] It is a plant of Mars. Dioscorides and Pliny
write, That the leaves and roots hereof taken in drink, help those that
have a crick in their neck, that they cannot turn it, unless they turn
their whole body. Galen saith, That the roots and leaves hereof are
good for such persons that have their bodies drawn together by some
spasm or convulsion, or other infirmities; as the rickets (or as the
college of physicians would have it, Rachites, about which name they
have quarrelled sufficiently) in children, being a disease that hinders
their growth, by binding their nerves, ligaments, and whole structure
of their body.


    THE FULLER’S THISTLE, OR TEASLE.

IT is so well known, that it needs no description, being used with the
clothworkers.

The wild Teasle is in all things like the former, but that the prickles
are small, soft, and upright, not hooked or stiff, and the flowers
of this are of a fine blueish, or pale carnation colour, but of the
manured kind, whitish.

_Place._] The first grows, being sown in gardens or fields for the use
of clothworkers: The other near ditches and rills of water in many
places of this land.

_Time._] They flower in July, and are ripe in the end of August.

_Government and virtues._] It is an herb of Venus. Dioscorides saith,
That the root bruised and boiled in wine, till it be thick, and kept
in a brazen vessel, and after spread as a salve, and applied to the
fundament, doth heal the cleft thereof, cankers and fistulas therein,
also takes away warts and wens. The juice of the leaves dropped into
the ears, kills worms in them. The distilled water of the leaves
dropped into the eyes, takes away redness and mists in them that
hinder the sight, and is often used by women to preserve their beauty,
and to take away redness and inflammations, and all other heat or
discolourings.


    TREACLE MUSTARD.

_Descript._] IT rises up with a hard round stalk, about a foot high,
parted into some branches, having divers soft green leaves, long
and narrow, set thereon, waved, but not cut into the edges, broadest
towards the ends, somewhat round pointed; the flowers are white that
grow at the tops of the branches, spike-fashion, one above another;
after which come round pouches, parted in the middle with a furrow,
having one blackish brown seed on either side, somewhat sharp in taste,
and smelling of garlick, especially in the fields where it is natural,
but not so much in gardens: The roots are small and thready, perishing
every year.

Give me leave here to add Mithridate Mustard, although it may seem more
properly by the name to belong to M, in the alphabet.


    MITHRIDATE MUSTARD.

_Descript._] THIS grows higher than the former, spreading more and
higher branches, whose leaves are smaller and narrower, sometimes
unevenly dented about the edges. The flowers are small and white,
growing on long branches, with much smaller and rounder vessels after
them, and parted in the same manner, having smaller brown seeds than
the former, and much sharper in taste. The root perishes after seed
time, but abides the first Winter after springing.

_Place._] They grow in sundry places in this land, as half a mile from
Hatfield, by the river side, under a hedge as you go to Hatfield, and
in the street of Peckham on Surrey side.

_Time._] They flower and seed from May to August.

_Government and virtues._] Both of them are herbs of Mars. The Mustards
are said to purge the body both upwards and downwards, and procure
women’s courses so abundantly, that it suffocates the birth. It breaks
inward imposthumes, being taken inwardly; and used in clysters, helps
the sciatica. The seed applied, doth the same. It is an especial
ingredient in mithridate and treacle, being of itself an antidote
resisting poison, venom and putrefaction. It is also available in many
cases for which the common Mustard is used, but somewhat weaker.


    THE BLACK THORN, OR SLOE-BUSH.

IT is so well known, that it needs no description.

_Place._] It grows in every county in the hedges and borders of fields.

_Time._] It flowers in April, and sometimes in March, but the fruit
ripens after all other plums whatsoever, and is not fit to be eaten
until the Autumn frost mellow them.

_Government and virtues._] All the parts of the Sloe-Bush are binding,
cooling, and dry, and all effectual to stay bleeding at the nose and
mouth, or any other place; the lask of the belly or stomach, or the
bloody flux, the too much abounding of women’s courses, and helps
to ease the pains of the sides, and bowels, that come by overmuch
scouring, to drink the decoction of the bark of the roots, or more
usually the decoction of the berries, either fresh or dried. The
conserve also is of very much use, and more familiarly taken for the
purposes aforesaid. But the distilled water of the flower first steeped
in sack for a night, and drawn therefrom by the heat of Balneum and
Anglico, a bath, is a most certain remedy, tried and approved, to
ease all manner of gnawings in the stomach, the sides and bowels,
or any griping pains in any of them, to drink a small quantity when
the extremity of pain is upon them. The leaves also are good to make
lotions to gargle and wash the mouth and throat, wherein are swellings,
sores, or kernels; and to stay the defluctions of rheum to the eyes,
or other parts; as also to cool the heat and inflammations of them,
and ease hot pains of the head, to bathe the forehead and temples
therewith. The simple distilled water of the flowers is very effectual
for the said purposes, and the condensate juice of the Sloes. The
distilled water of the green berries is used also for the said effects.


    THOROUGH WAX, OR THOROUGH LEAF.

_Descript._] COMMON Thorough-Wax sends forth a strait round stalk, two
feet high, or better, whose lower leaves being of a bluish colour, are
smaller and narrower than those up higher, and stand close thereto,
not compassing it; but as they grow higher, they do not encompass
the stalks, until it wholly pass through them, branching toward the
top into many parts, where the leaves grow smaller again, every one
standing singly, and never two at a joint. The flowers are small
and yellow, standing in tufts at the heads of the branches, where
afterwards grow the seed, being blackish, many thick thrust together.
The root is small, long and woody, perishing every year, after
seed-time, and rising again plentifully of its own sowing.

_Place._] It is found growing in many corn-fields and pasture grounds
in this land.

_Time._] It flowers in July, and the seed is ripe in August.

_Government and virtues._] Both this and the former are under the
influence of Saturn. Thorough-Wax is of singular good use for all sorts
of bruises and wounds either inward or outward; and old ulcers and
sores likewise, if the decoction of the herb with water and wine be
drank, and the place washed therewith, or the juice of the green herb
bruised, or boiled, either by itself, or with other herbs, in oil or
hog’s grease, to be made into an ointment to serve all the year. The
decoction of the herb, or powder of the dried herb, taken inwardly, and
the same, or the leaves bruised, and applied outwardly, is singularly
good for all ruptures and burstings, especially in children before they
be too old. Being applied with a little flour and wax to children’s
navels that stick forth, it helps them.


    THYME.

IT is in vain to describe an herb so commonly known.

_Government and virtues._] It is a noble strengthener of the lungs, as
notable a one as grows; neither is there scarce a better remedy growing
for that disease in children which they commonly call the Chin-cough,
than it is. It purges the body of phlegm, and is an excellent remedy
for shortness of breath. It kills worms in the belly, and being a
notable herb of Venus, provokes the terms, gives safe and speedy
delivery to women in travail, and brings away the after birth. It is so
harmless you need not fear the use of it. An ointment made of it takes
away hot swellings and warts, helps the sciatica and dullness of sight,
and takes away pains and hardness of the spleen. ’Tis excellent for
those that are troubled with the gout. It eases pains in the loins and
hips. The herb taken any way inwardly, comforts the stomach much, and
expels wind.


    WILD THYME, OR MOTHER OF THYME.

WILD Thyme also is so well known, that it needs no description.

_Place._] It may be found commonly in commons, and other barren places
throughout the nation.

_Government and virtues._] It is under the dominion of Venus, and
under the sign Aries, and therefore chiefly appropriated to the head.
It provokes urine and the terms, and eases the griping pain of the
belly, cramps, ruptures, and inflamation of the liver. If you make a
vinegar of the herb, as vinegar of roses is made (you may find out
the way in my translation of the London Dispensatory) and anoint the
head with it, it presently stops the pains thereof. It is excellently
good to be given either in phrenzy or lethargy, although they are two
contrary diseases: It helps spitting and voiding of blood, coughing,
and vomiting; it comforts and strengthens the head, stomach, reins, and
womb, expels wind, and breaks the stone.


    TORMENTIL, OR SEPTFOIL.

_Descript._] THIS hath reddish, slender, weak branches rising from the
root, lying on the ground, rather leaning than standing upright, with
many short leaves that stand closer to the stalk than cinquefoil (to
which this is very like) with the root-stalk compassing the branches
in several places; but those that grow to the ground are set upon
long foot stalks, each whereof are like the leaves of cinquefoil, but
somewhat long and lesser dented about the edges, many of them divided
into five leaves, but most of them into seven, whence it is also called
Septfoil; yet some may have six, and some eight, according to the
fertility of the soil. At the tops of the branches stand divers small
yellow flowers, consisting of five leaves, like those of cinquefoil,
but smaller. The root is smaller than bistort, somewhat thick, but
blacker without, and not so red within, yet sometimes a little crooked,
having blackish fibres thereat.

_Place._] It grows as well in woods and shadowy places, as in the open
champain country, about the borders of fields in many places of this
land, and almost in every broom field in Essex.

_Time._] It flowers all the Summer long.

_Government and virtues._] This is a gallant herb of the Sun. Tormentil
is most excellent to stay all kind of fluxes of blood or humours in man
or woman, whether at nose, mouth, or belly. The juice of the herb and
root, or the decoction thereof, taken with some Venice treacle, and
the person laid to sweat, expels any venom or poison, or the plague,
fever, or other contagious diseases, as pox, measles, &c. for it is an
ingredient in all antidotes or counter poisons. Andreas Urlesius is of
opinion that the decoction of this root is no less effectual to cure
the French pox than Guiacum or China; and it is not unlikely, because
it so mightily resists putrefaction. The root taken inwardly is most
effectual to help any flux of the belly, stomach, spleen, or blood; and
the juice wonderfully opens obstructions of the liver and lungs, and
thereby helps the yellow jaundice. The powder or decoction drank, or
to sit thereon as a bath, is an assured remedy against abortion, if it
proceed from the over flexibility or weakness of the inward retentive
faculty; as also a plaster made therewith, and vinegar applied to
the reins of the back, doth much help not only this, but also those
that cannot hold their water, the powder being taken in the juice of
plantain, and is also commended against the worms in children. It
is very powerful in ruptures and burstings, as also for bruises and
falls, to be used as well outwardly as inwardly. The root hereof made
up with pellitory of Spain and allum, and put into a hollow tooth, not
only assuages the pain, but stays the flux of humours which causes it.
Tormentil is no less effectual and powerful a remedy against outward
wounds, sores and hurts, than for inward, and is therefore a special
ingredient to be used in wound drinks, lotions and injections, for
foul corrupt rotten sores and ulcers of the mouth, secrets, or other
parts of the body. The juice or powder of the root put in ointments,
plaisters, and such things that are to be applied to wounds or sores,
is very effectual, as the juice of the leaves and the root bruised
and applied to the throat or jaws, heals the king’s evil, and eases
the pain of the sciatica; the same used with a little vinegar, is a
special remedy against the running sores of the head or other parts;
scabs also, and the itch or any such eruptions in the skin, proceeding
of salt and sharp humours. The same is also effectual for the piles
or hæmorrhoids, if they be washed or bathed therewith, or with the
distilled water of the herb and roots. It is found also helpful to dry
up any sharp rheum that distills from the head into the eyes, causing
redness, pain, waterings, itching, or the like, if a little prepared
tutia, or white amber, be used with the distilled water thereof. And
here is enough, only remember the Sun challengeth this herb.


    TURNSOLE, OR HELIOTROPIUM.

_Descript._] THE greater Turnsole rises with one upright stalk, about a
foot high, or more, dividing itself almost from the bottom, into divers
small branches, of a hoary colour; at each joint of the stalk and
branches grow small broad leaves, somewhat white and hairy. At the tops
of the stalks and branches stand small white flowers, consisting of
four, and sometimes five small leaves, set in order one above another,
upon a small crooked spike, which turns inwards like a bowed finger,
opening by degrees as the flowers blow open; after which in their place
come forth cornered seed, four for the most part standing together; the
root is small and thready, perishing every year, and the seed shedding
every year, raises it again the next spring.

_Place._] It grows in gardens, and flowers and seeds with us,
notwithstanding it is not natural to this land, but to Italy, Spain,
and France, where it grows plentifully.

_Government and virtues._] It is an herb of the Sun, and a good one
too. Dioscorides saith, That a good handful of this, which is called
the Great Turnsole, boiled in water, and drank, purges both choler and
phlegm; and boiled with cummin, helps the stone in the reins, kidneys,
or bladder, provokes urine and women’s courses, and causes an easy
and speedy delivery in child-birth. The leaves bruised and applied to
places pained with the gout, or that have been out of joint and newly
set, and full of pain, do give much ease; the seed and juice of the
leaves also being rubbed with a little salt upon warts and wens, and
other kernels in the face, eye-lids, or any other part of the body,
will, by often using, take them away.


    MEADOW TREFOIL, OR HONEYSUCKLES.

IT is so well known, especially by the name of Honeysuckles, white and
red, that I need not describe them.

_Place._] They grow almost every where in this land.

_Government and virtues._] Mercury hath dominion over the common sort.
Dodoneus saith, The leaves and flowers are good to ease the griping
pains of the gout, the herb being boiled and used in a clyster. If
the herb be made into a poultice, and applied to inflammations, it
will ease them. The juice dropped in the eyes, is a familiar medicine,
with many country people, to take away the pin and web (as they call
it) in the eyes; it also allays the heat and blood shooting of them.
Country people do also in many places drink the juice thereof against
the biting of an adder; and having boiled the herb in water, they
first wash the place with the decoction, and then lay some of the herb
also to the hurt place. The herb also boiled in swine’s grease, and so
made into an ointment, is good to apply to the biting of any venomous
creature. The herb also bruised and heated between tiles, and applied
hot to the share, causes them to make water who had it stopt before.
It is held likewise to be good for wounds, and to take away seed. The
decoction of the herb and flowers, with the seed and root, taken for
some time, helps women that are troubled with the whites. The seed and
flowers boiled in water, and afterwards made into a poultice with some
oil, and applied, helps hard swellings and imposthumes.


    HEART TREFOIL.

BESIDES the ordinary sort of Trefoil, here are two more remarkable, and
one of which may be properly called Heart Trefoil, not only because the
leaf is triangular, like the heart of a man, but also because each leaf
contains the perfection of a heart, and that in its proper colour, viz.
a flesh colour.

_Place._] It grows between Longford and Bow, and beyond Southwark, by
the highway and parts adjacent.

_Government and virtues._] It is under the dominion of the Sun, and if
it were used, it would be found as great a strengthener of the heart,
and cherisher of the vital spirits as grows, relieving the body against
fainting and swoonings, fortifying it against poison and pestilence,
defending the heart against the noisome vapours of the spleen.


    PEARL TREFOIL.

IT differs not from the common sort, save only in this particular, it
hath a white spot in the leaf like a pearl. It is particularly under
the dominion of the Moon, and its icon shews that it is of a singular
virtue against the pearl, or pin and web in the eyes.


    TUSTAN, OR PARK LEAVES.

_Descript._] IT hath brownish shining round stalks, crested the length
thereof, rising two by two, and sometimes three feet high, branching
forth even from the bottom, having divers joints, and at each of them
two fair large leaves standing, of a dark blueish green colour on the
upper side, and of a yellowish green underneath, turning reddish toward
Autumn. At the top of the stalks stand large yellow flowers, and heads
with seed, which being greenish at the first and afterwards reddish,
turn to be of a blackish purple colour when they are ripe, with small
brownish seed within them, and they yield a reddish juice or liquor,
somewhat resinous, and of a harsh and stypick taste, as the leaves also
and the flowers be, although much less, but do not yield such a clear
claret wine colour, as some say it doth, the root is brownish, somewhat
great, hard and woody, spreading well in the ground.

_Place._] It grows in many woods, groves, and woody grounds, as parks
and forests, and by hedge-sides in many places in this land, as in
Hampstead wood, by Ratley in Essex, in the wilds of Kent, and in many
other places needless to recite.

_Time._] It flowers later than St. John’s or St. Peter’s-wort.

_Government and virtues._] It is an herb of Saturn, and a most noble
anti-venerean. Tustan purges choleric humours, as St. Peter’s-wort,
is said to do, for therein it works the same effects, both to help
the sciatica and gout, and to heal burning by fire; it stays all the
bleedings of wounds, if either the green herb be bruised, or the powder
of the dry be applied thereto. It hath been accounted, and certainly it
is, a sovereign herb to heal either wound or sore, either outwardly or
inwardly, and therefore always used in drinks, lotions, balms, oils,
ointments, or any other sorts of green wounds, ulcers, or old sores, in
all which the continual experience of former ages hath confirmed the
use thereof to be admirably good, though it be not so much in use now,
as when physicians and surgeons were so wise as to use herbs more than
now they do.


    GARDEN VALERIAN.

_Descript._] THIS hath a thick short greyish root, lying for the most
part above ground, shooting forth on all other sides such like small
pieces of roots, which have all of them many long green strings and
fibres under them in the ground, whereby it draws nourishment. From
the head of these roots spring up many green leaves, which at first
are somewhat broad and long, without any divisions at all in them, or
denting on the edges; but those that rise up after are more and more
divided on each side, some to the middle rib, being winged, as made of
many leaves together on a stalk, and those upon a stalk, in like manner
more divided, but smaller towards the top than below; the stalk rises
to be a yard high or more, sometimes branched at the top, with many
small whitish flowers, sometimes dashed over at the edges with a pale
purplish colour, of a little scent, which passing away, there follows
small brownish white seed, that is easily carried away with the wind.
The root smells more strong than either leaf or flower, and is of more
use in medicines.

_Place._] It is generally kept with us in gardens.

_Time._] It flowers in June and July, and continues flowering until the
frost pull it down.

_Government and virtues._] This is under the influence of Mercury.
Dioscorides saith, That the Garden Valerian hath a warming faculty,
and that being dried and given to drink it provokes urine, and helps
the stranguary. The decoction thereof taken, doth the like also, and
takes away pains of the sides, provokes women’s courses, and is used
in antidotes. Pliny saith, That the powder of the root given in drink,
or the decoction thereof taken, helps all stoppings and stranglings
in any part of the body, whether they proceed of pains in the chest
or sides, and takes them away. The root of Valerian boiled with
liquorice, raisins, and anniseed, is singularly good for those that are
short-winded, and for those that are troubled with the cough, and helps
to open the passages, and to expectorate phlegm easily. It is given to
those that are bitten or stung by any venomous creature, being boiled
in wine. It is of a special virtue against the plague, the decoction
thereof being drank, and the root being used to smell to. It helps
to expel the wind in the belly. The green herb with the root taken
fresh, being bruised and applied to the head, takes away the pains and
prickings there, stays rheum and thin distillation, and being boiled
in white wine, and a drop thereof put into the eyes, takes away the
dimness of the sight, or any pin or web therein. It is of excellent
property to heal any inward sores or wounds, and also for outward hurts
or wounds, and drawing away splinters or thorns out of the flesh.


    VERVAIN.

_Descript._] THE common Vervain hath somewhat long broad leaves next
the ground deeply gashed about the edges, and some only deeply dented,
or cut all alike, of a blackish green colour on the upper side,
somewhat grey underneath. The stalk is square, branched into several
parts, rising about two feet high, especially if you reckon the long
spike of flowers at the tops of them, which are set on all sides one
above another, and sometimes two or three together, being small and
gaping, of a blue colour and white intermixed, after which come small
round seed, in small and somewhat long heads. The root is small and
long.

_Place._] It grows generally throughout this land in divers places of
the hedges and way-sides, and other waste grounds.

_Time._] It flowers in July, and the seed is ripe soon after.

_Government and virtues._] This is an herb of Venus, and excellent
for the womb to strengthen and remedy all the cold griefs of it, as
Plantain doth the hot. Vervain is hot and dry, opening obstructions,
cleansing and healing. It helps the yellow jaundice, the dropsy and the
gout; it kills and expels worms in the belly, and causes a good colour
in the face and body, strengthens as well as corrects the diseases
of the stomach, liver, and spleen; helps the cough, wheezings, and
shortness of breath, and all the defects of the reins and bladder,
expelling the gravel and stone. It is held to be good against the
biting of serpents, and other venomous beasts, against the plague,
and both tertian and quartan agues. It consolidates and heals also
all wounds, both inward and outward, stays bleedings, and used with
some honey, heals all old ulcers and fistulas in the legs or other
parts of the body; as also those ulcers that happen in the mouth; or
used with hog’s grease, it helps the swellings and pains of the secret
parts in man or woman, also for the piles or hæmorrhoids; applied with
some oil of roses and vinegar unto the forehead and temples, it eases
the inveterate pains and ache of the head, and is good for those that
are frantic. The leaves bruised, or the juice of them mixed with some
vinegar, doth wonderfully cleanse the skin, and takes away morphew,
freckles, fistulas, and other such like inflamations and deformities
of the skin in any parts of the body. The distilled water of the herb
when it is in full strength, dropped into the eyes, cleanses them
from films, clouds, or mists, that darken the sight, and wonderfully
strengthens the optic nerves. The said water is very powerful in all
the diseases aforesaid, either inward or outward, whether they be old
corroding sores, or green wounds. The dried root, and peeled, is known
to be excellently good against all scrophulous and scorbutic habits
of body, by being tied to the pit of the stomach, by a piece of white
ribband round the neck.


    THE VINE.

THE leaves of the English vine (I do not mean to send you to the
Canaries for a medicine) being boiled, makes a good lotion for sore
mouths; being boiled with barley meal into a poultice, it cools
inflammations of wounds; the dropping of the vine, when it is cut in
the Spring, which country people call Tears, being boiled in a syrup,
with sugar, and taken inwardly, is excellent to stay women’s longings
after every thing they see, which is a disease many women with child
are subject to. The decoction of Vine leaves in white wine doth the
like. Also the tears of the Vine, drank two or three spoonfuls at a
time, breaks the stone in the bladder. This is a very good remedy, and
it is discreetly done, to kill a Vine to cure a man, but the salt of
the leaves are held to be better. The ashes of the burnt branches will
make teeth that are as black as a coal, to be as white as snow, if you
but every morning rub them with it. It is a most gallant Tree of the
Sun, very sympathetical with the body of men, and that is the reason
spirit of wine is the greatest cordial among all vegetables.


    VIOLETS.

BOTH the tame and the wild are so well known, that they need no
description.

_Time._] They flower until the end of July, but are best in March, and
the beginning of April.

_Government and virtues._] They are a fine pleasing plant of Venus,
of a mild nature, no way harmful. All the Violets are cold and moist
while they are fresh and green, and are used to cool any heat,
or distemperature of the body, either inwardly or outwardly, as
inflammations in the eyes, in the matrix or fundament, in imposthumes
also, and hot swellings, to drink the decoction of the leaves and
flowers made with water in wine, or to apply them poultice-wise to the
grieved places: it likewise eases pains in the head, caused through
want of sleep; or any other pains arising of heat, being applied in
the same manner, or with oil of roses. A dram weight of the dried
leaves or flower of Violets, but the leaves more strongly, doth purge
the body of choleric humours, and assuages the heat, being taken in a
draught of wine, or any other drink; the powder of the purple leaves
of the flowers, only picked and dried and drank in water, is said to
help the quinsy, and the falling-sickness in children, especially in
the beginning of the disease. The flowers of the white Violets ripen
and dissolve swellings. The herb or flowers, while they are fresh, or
the flowers when they are dry, are effectual in the pleurisy, and all
diseases of the lungs, to lenify the sharpness in hot rheums, and the
hoarseness of the throat, the heat also and sharpness of urine, and
all the pains of the back or reins, and bladder. It is good also for
the liver and the jaundice, and all hot agues, to cool the heat, and
quench the thirst; but the syrup of Violets is of most use, and of
better effect, being taken in some convenient liquor: and if a little
of the juice or syrup of lemons be put to it, or a few drops of the
oil of vitriol, it is made thereby the more powerful to cool the heat,
and quench the thirst, and gives to the drink a claret wine colour,
and a fine tart relish, pleasing to the taste. Violets taken, or made
up with honey, do more cleanse and cool, and with sugar contrary-wise.
The dried flower of Violets are accounted amongst the cordial drinks,
powders, and other medicines, especially where cooling cordials are
necessary. The green leaves are used with other herbs to make plaisters
and poultices to inflammations and swellings, and to ease all pains
whatsoever, arising of heat, and for the piles also, being fried with
yolks of eggs, and applied thereto.


    VIPER’S BUGLOSS.

_Descript._] THIS hath many long rough leaves lying on the ground,
from among which rises up divers hard round stalks, very rough, as if
they were thick set with prickles or hairs, whereon are set such like
rough, hairy, or prickly sad green leaves, somewhat narrow; the middle
rib for the most part being white. The flowers stand at the top of the
stalk, branched forth in many long spiked leaves of flowers bowing or
turning like the turnsole, all opening for the most part on the one
side, which are long and hollow, turning up the brims a little, of a
purplish violet colour in them that are fully blown, but more reddish
while they are in the bud, as also upon their decay and withering; but
in some places of a paler purplish colour, with a long pointel in the
middle, feathered or parted at the top. After the flowers are fallen,
the seeds growing to be ripe, are blackish, cornered and pointed
somewhat like the head of a viper. The root is somewhat great and
blackish, and woolly, when it grows toward seed-time, and perishes in
the Winter.

There is another sort, little differing from the former, only in this,
that it bears white flowers.

_Place._] The first grows wild almost every where. That with white
flowers about the castle-walls at Lewis in Sussex.

_Time._] They flower in Summer, and their seed is ripe quickly after.

_Government and virtues._] It is a most gallant herb of the Sun; it
is a pity it is no more in use than it is. It is an especial remedy
against the biting of the Viper, and all other venomous beasts, or
serpents; as also against poison, or poisonous herbs. Dioscorides and
others say, That whosoever shall take of the herb or root before they
be bitten, shall not be hurt by the poison of any serpent. The root or
seed is thought to be most effectual to comfort the heart, and expel
sadness, or causeless melancholy; it tempers the blood, and allays
hot fits of agues. The seed drank in wine, procures abundance of milk
in women’s breasts. The same also being taken, eases the pains in the
loins, back, and kidneys. The distilled water of the herb when it is
in flower, or its chief strength, is excellent to be applied either
inwardly or outwardly, for all the griefs aforesaid. There is a syrup
made hereof very effectual for the comforting the heart, and expelling
sadness and melancholy.


    WALL FLOWERS, OR WINTER GILLI-FLOWERS.

THE garden kind are so well known that they need no description.

_Descript._] The common single Wall-flowers, which grow wild abroad,
have sundry small, long, narrow, dark green leaves, set without order
upon small round, whitish, woody stalks, which bear at the tops divers
single yellow flowers one above another, every one bearing four leaves
a-piece, and of a very sweet scent: after which come long pods,
containing a reddish seed. The roots are white, hard and thready.

_Place._] It grows upon church walls, and old walls of many houses, and
other stone walls in divers places; The other sort in gardens only.

_Time._] All the single kinds do flower many times in the end of
Autumn; and if the Winter be mild, all the Winter long, but especially
in the months of February, March, and April, and until the heat of
the spring do spend them. But the double kinds continue not flowering
in that manner all the year long, although they flower very early
sometimes, and in some places very late.

_Government and virtues._] The Moon rules them. Galen, in his seventh
book of simple medicines, saith, That the yellow Wall-flowers work more
powerfully than any of the other kinds, and are therefore of more use
in physic. It cleanses the blood, and fretteth the liver and reins from
obstructions, provokes women’s courses, expels the secundine, and the
dead child; helps the hardness and pain of the mother, and of spleen
also; stays inflammations and swellings, comforts and strengthens any
weak part, or out of joint; helps to cleanse the eyes from mistiness or
films upon them, and to cleanse the filthy ulcers in the mouth, or any
other part, and is a singular remedy for the gout, and all aches and
pains in the joints and sinews. A conserve made of the flowers, is used
for a remedy both for the apoplexy and palsy.


    THE WALLNUT TREE.

IT is so well known, that it needs no description.

_Time._] It blossoms early before the leaves come forth, and the fruit
is ripe in September.

_Government and virtues._] This is also a plant of the Sun. Let the
fruit of it be gathered accordingly, which you shall find to be of most
virtues while they are green, before they have shells. The bark of
the Tree doth bind and dry very much, and the leaves are much of the
same temperature: but the leaves when they are older, are heating and
drying in the second degree, and harder of digestion than when they
are fresh, which, by reason of their sweetness, are more pleasing,
and better digesting in the stomach; and taken with sweet wine, they
move the belly downwards, but being old, they grieve the stomach; and
in hot bodies cause the choler to abound and the head-ach, and are an
enemy to those that have the cough; but are less hurtful to those that
have a colder stomach, and are said to kill the broad worms in the
belly or stomach. If they be taken with onions, salt, and honey, they
help the biting of a mad dog, or the venom or infectious poison of any
beast, &c. Caias Pompeius found in the treasury of Mithridates, king
of Pontus, when he was overthrown, a scroll of his own hand writing,
containing a medicine against any poison or infection; which is this;
Take two dry walnuts, and as many good figs, and twenty leaves of
rue, bruised and beaten together with two or three corns of salt and
twenty juniper berries, which take every morning fasting, preserves
from danger of poison, and infection that day it is taken. The juice
of the other green husks boiled with honey is an excellent gargle for
sore mouths, or the heat and inflammations in the throat and stomach.
The kernels, when they grow old, are more oily, and therefore not
fit to be eaten, but are then used to heal the wounds of the sinews,
gangrenes, and carbuncles. The said kernels being burned, are very
astringent, and will stay lasks and women’s courses, being taken in
red wine, and stay the falling of the hair, and make it fair, being
anointed with oil and wine. The green husks will do the like, being
used in the same manner. The kernels beaten with rue and wine, being
applied, help the quinsy; and bruised with some honey, and applied to
the ears, ease the pains and inflammation of them. A piece of the green
husks put into a hollow tooth, eases the pain. The catkins hereof,
taken before they fall off, dried, and given a dram thereof in powder
with white wine, wonderfully helps those that are troubled with the
rising of the mother. The oil that is pressed out of the kernels,
is very profitable, taken inwardly like oil of almonds, to help the
cholic, and to expel wind very effectually; an ounce or two thereof may
be taken at any time. The young green nuts taken before they be half
ripe, and preserved with sugar, are of good use for those that have
weak stomachs, or defluctions thereon. The distilled water of the green
husks, before they be half ripe, is of excellent use to cool the heat
of agues, being drank an ounce or two at a time: as also to resist the
infection of the plague, if some of the same be also applied to the
sores thereof. The same also cools the heat of green wounds and old
ulcers, and heals them, being bathed therewith. The distilled water of
the green husks being ripe, when they are shelled from the nuts, and
drank with a little vinegar, is good for the place, so as before the
taking thereof a vein be opened. The said water is very good against
the quinsy, being gargled and bathed therewith, and wonderfully helps
deafness, the noise, and other pains in the ears. The distilled water
of the young green leaves in the end of May, performs a singular cure
on foul running ulcers and sores, to be bathed, with wet cloths or
spunges applied to them every morning.


    WOLD, WELD, OR DYER’S WEED.

THE common kind grows bushing with many leaves, long, narrow and
flat upon the ground; of a dark blueish green colour, somewhat like
unto Woad, but nothing so large, a little crumpled, and as it were
round-pointed, which do so abide the first year; and the next spring
from among them, rise up divers round stalks, two or three feet high,
beset with many such like leaves thereon, but smaller, and shooting
forth small branches, which with the stalks carry many small yellow
flowers, in a long spiked head at the top of them, where afterwards
come the seed, which is small and black, inclosed in heads that are
divided at the tops into four parts. The root is long, white and thick,
abiding the Winter. The whole herb changes to be yellow, after it hath
been in flower awhile.

_Place._] It grows every where by the way sides, in moist grounds, as
well as dry, in corners of fields and bye lanes, and sometimes all over
the field. In Sussex and Kent they call it Green Weed.

_Time._] It flowers in June.

_Government and virtues._] Matthiolus saith, that the root hereof cures
tough phlegm, digests raw phlegm, thins gross humours, dissolves hard
tumours, and opens obstructions. Some do highly commend it against
the biting of venomous creatures, to be taken inwardly and applied
outwardly to the hurt place; as also for the plague or pestilence. The
people in some countries of this land, do use to bruise the herb, and
lay it to cuts or wounds in the hands or legs, to heal them.


    WHEAT.

ALL the several kinds thereof are so well known unto almost all people,
that it is all together needless to write a description thereof.

_Government and virtues._] It is under Venus. Dioscorides saith, That
to eat the corn of green Wheat is hurtful to the stomach, and breeds
worms. Pliny saith, That the corn of Wheat, roasted upon an iron pan,
and eaten, are a present remedy for those that are chilled with cold.
The oil pressed from wheat, between two thick plates of iron, or copper
heated, heals all tetters and ring-worms, being used warm; and hereby
Galen saith, he hath known many to be cured. Matthiolus commends the
same to be put into hollow ulcers to heal them up, and it is good for
chops in the hands and feet, and to make rugged skin smooth. The green
corns of Wheat being chewed, and applied to the place bitten by a mad
dog, heals it; slices of Wheat bread soaked in red rose water, and
applied to the eyes that are hot, red, and inflamed, or blood-shotten,
helps them. Hot bread applied for an hour, at times, for three days
together, perfectly heals the kernels in the throat, commonly called
the king’s evil. The flour of Wheat mixed with the juice of henbane,
stays the flux of humours to the joints, being laid thereon. The said
meal boiled in vinegar, helps the shrinking of the sinews, saith Pliny;
and mixed with vinegar, and boiled together, heals all freckles, spots
and pimples on the face. Wheat flour, mixed with the yolk of an egg,
honey, and turpentine, doth draw, cleanse and heal any boil, plague,
sore, or foul ulcer. The bran of Wheat meal steeped in sharp vinegar,
and then bound in a linen cloth, and rubbed on those places that have
the scurf, morphew, scabs or leprosy, will take them away, the body
being first well purged and prepared. The decoction of the bran of
Wheat or barley, is of good use to bathe those places that are bursten
by a rupture; and the said bran boiled in good vinegar, and applied
to swollen breasts, helps them, and stays all inflamations. It helps
also the biting of vipers (which I take to be no other than our English
adder) and all other venomous creatures. The leaves of Wheat meal
applied with some salt, take away hardness of the skin, warts, and hard
knots in the flesh. Wafers put in water, and drank, stays the lask
and bloody flux, and are profitably used both inwardly and outwardly
for the ruptures in children. Boiled in water unto a thick jelly, and
taken, it stays spitting of blood; and boiled with mint and butter, it
helps the hoarseness of the throat.


    THE WILLOW TREE.

THESE are so well known that they need no description. I shall
therefore only shew you the virtues therof.

_Government and virtues._] The Moon owns it. Both the leaves, bark,
and the seed, are used to stanch bleeding of wounds, and at mouth and
nose, spitting of blood, and other fluxes of blood in man or woman,
and to stay vomiting, and provocation thereunto, if the decoction of
them in wine be drank. It helps also to stay thin, hot, sharp, salt
distillations from the head upon the lungs, causing a consumption. The
leaves bruised with some pepper, and drank in wine, helps much the wind
cholic. The leaves bruised and boiled in wine, and drank, stays the
heat of lust in man or woman, and quite extinguishes it, if it be long
used: The seed also is of the same effect. Water that is gathered from
the Willow, when it flowers, the bark being slit, and a vessel fitting
to receive it, is very good for redness and dimness of sight, or films
that grow over the eyes, and stay the rheums that fall into them; to
provoke urine, being stopped, if it be drank; to clear the face and
skin from spots and discolourings. Galen saith, The flowers have an
admirable faculty in drying up humours, being a medicine without any
sharpness or corrosion; you may boil them in white wine, and drink as
much as you will, so you drink not yourself drunk. The bark works the
same effect, if used in the same manner, and the Tree hath always a
bark upon it, though not always flowers; the burnt ashes of the bark
being mixed with vinegar, takes away warts, corns, and superfluous
flesh, being applied to the place. The decoction of the leaves or bark
in wine, takes away scurff and dandriff by washing the place with it.
It is a fine cool tree, the boughs of which are very convenient to be
placed in the chamber of one sick of a fever.


    WOAD.

_Descript._] IT hath divers large leaves, long, and somewhat broad
withal, like those of the greater plantain, but larger, thicker, of a
greenish colour, somewhat blue withal. From among which leaves rises up
a lusty stalk, three or four feet high, with divers leaves set thereon;
the higher the stalk rises, the smaller are the leaves; at the top it
spreads divers branches, at the end of which appear very pretty, little
yellow flowers, and after they pass away like other flowers of the
field, come husks, long and somewhat flat withal; in form they resemble
a tongue, in colour they are black, and they hang bobbing downwards.
The seed contained within these husks (if it be a little chewed) gives
an azure colour. The root is white and long.

_Place._] It is sowed in fields for the benefit of it, where those
that sow it, cut it three times a year.

_Time._] It flowers in June, but it is long after before the seed is
ripe.

_Government and virtues._] It is a cold and dry plant of Saturn. Some
people affirm the plant to be destructive to bees, and fluxes them,
which, if it be, I cannot help it. I should rather think, unless bees
be contrary to other creatures, it possesses them with the contrary
disease, the herb being exceeding dry and binding. However, if any bees
be diseased thereby, the cure is, to set urine by them, but set it in
a vessel, that they cannot drown themselves, which may be remedied, if
you put pieces of cork in it. The herb is so drying and binding, that
it is not fit to be given inwardly. An ointment made thereof stanches
bleeding. A plaister made thereof, and applied to the region of the
spleen which lies on the left side, takes away the hardness and pains
thereof. The ointment is excellently good in such ulcers as abound with
moisture, and takes away the corroding and fretting humours: It cools
inflammations, quenches St. Anthony’s fire, and stays defluxion of the
blood to any part of the body.


    WOODBINE, OR HONEY-SUCKLES.

IT is a plant so common, that every one that hath eyes knows it, and he
that hath none, cannot read a description, if I should write it.

_Time._] They flower in June, and the fruit is ripe in August.

_Government and virtues._] Doctor Tradition, that grand introducer of
errors, that hater of truth, lover of folly, and the mortal foe to Dr.
Reason, hath taught the common people to use the leaves or flowers of
this plant in mouth-water, and by long continuance of time, hath so
grounded it in the brains of the vulgar, that you cannot beat it out
with a beetle: All mouth-waters ought to be cooling and drying, but
Honey Suckles are cleansing, consuming and digesting, and therefore
fit for inflammations; thus Dr. Reason. Again if you please, we will
leave Dr. Reason a while, and come to Dr. Experience, a learned
gentleman, and his brother. Take a leaf and chew it in your mouth, and
you will quickly find it likelier to cause a sore mouth and throat
than to cure it. Well then, if it be not good for this, What is it
good for? It is good for something, for God and nature made nothing in
vain. It is an herb of Mercury, and appropriated to the lungs; Crab
claims dominion over it; neither is it a foe to the Lion; if the lungs
be afflicted by Jupiter, this is your cure: It is fitting a conserve
made of the flowers of it were kept in every gentlewoman’s house; I
know no better cure for an asthma than this: besides, it takes away
the evil of the spleen, provokes urine, procures speedy delivery
of women in travail, helps cramps, convulsions, and palsies, and
whatsoever griefs come of cold or stopping; if you please to make use
of it as an ointment, it will clear your skin of morphew, freckles,
and sun-burnings, or whatsoever else discolours it, and then the maids
will love it. Authors say, The flowers are of more effect than the
leaves, and that is true; but they say the seeds are least effectual
of all. But Dr. Reason told me, That there was a vital spirit in every
seed to beget its like; and Dr. Experience told me, That there was a
greater heat in the seed than there was in any other part of the plant;
and withal, That heat was the mother of action, and then judge if old
Dr. Tradition (who may well be honoured for his age, but not for his
goodness) hath not so poisoned the world with errors before I was born,
that it was never well in its wits since, and there is a great fear it
will die mad.


    WORMWOOD.

THREE Wormwoods are familiar with us; one I shall not describe, another
I shall describe, and the third be critical at; and I care not greatly
if I begin with the last first.

_Sea Wormwood_ hath gotten as many names as virtues, (and perhaps one
more) Seriphian, Santomeon, Belchion, Narbinense, Hantonicon, Misneule,
and a matter of twenty more which I shall not blot paper withal. A
papist got the toy by the end, and he called it Holy Wormwood; and in
truth I am opinion, their giving so much holiness to herbs, is the
reason there remains so little in themselves. The seed of this Wormwood
is that which women usually give their children for the worms. Of all
Wormwoods that grow here, this is the weakest, but Doctors commend
it, and apothecaries sell it; the one must keep his credit, and the
other get money, and that is the key of the work. The herb is good for
something, because God made nothing in vain: Will you give me leave
to weigh things in the balance of reason; Then thus: The seeds of
the common Wormwood are far more prevalent than the seed of this, to
expel worms in children, or people of ripe age; of both some are weak,
some are strong. The Seriphian Wormwood is the weakest, and haply may
prove to be fittest for the weak bodies, (for it is weak enough of all
conscience.) Let such as are strong take the common Wormwood, for the
others will do but little good. Again, near the sea many people live,
and Seriphian grows near them, and therefore is more fitting for their
bodies, because nourished by the same air; and this I had from Dr.
Reason. In whose body Dr. Reason dwells not, dwells Dr. Madness, and
he brings in his brethren, Dr. Ignorance, Dr. Folly, and Dr. Sickness,
and these together make way for Death, and the latter end of that man
is worse than the beginning. Pride was the cause of Adam’s fall; pride
begat a daughter, I do not know the father of it, unless the devil,
but she christened it, and called it Appetite, and sent her daughter
to taste these wormwoods, who finding this the least bitter, made the
squeamish wench extol it to the skies, though the virtues of it never
reached the middle region of the air. Its due praise is this; It is
weakest, therefore fittest for weak bodies, and fitter for those bodies
that dwell near it, than those that dwell far from it; my reason is,
the sea (those that live far from it, know when they come near it)
casts not such a smell as the land doth. The tender mercies of God
being over all his works, hath by his eternal Providence, planted
Seriphian by the seaside, as a fit medicine for the bodies of those
that live near it. Lastly, It is known to all that know any thing in
the course of nature, that the liver delights in sweet things, if
so, it abhors bitter; then if your liver be weak, it is none of the
wisest courses to plague it with an enemy. If the liver be weak, a
consumption follows; would you know the reason? It is this, A man’s
flesh is repaired by blood, by a third concoction, which transmutes the
blood into flesh, it is well I said, (concoction) say I, if I had said
(boiling) every cook would have understood me. The liver makes blood,
and if it be weakened that if it makes not enough, the flesh wastes;
and why must flesh always be renewed? Because the eternal God, when he
made the creation, made one part of it in continual dependency upon
another; and why did he so? Because himself only is permanent; to teach
us, That we should not fix our affections upon what is transitory, but
what endures for ever. The result of this is, if the liver be weak, and
cannot make blood enough, I would have said, Sanguify, if I had written
only to scholars, the Seriphian, which is the weakest of Wormwoods, is
better than the best. I have been critical enough, if not too much.

_Place._] It grows familiarly in England, by the sea-side.

_Descript._] It starts up out of the earth, with many round, woody,
hairy stalks from one root. Its height is four feet, or three at least.
The leaves in longitude are long, in latitude narrow, in colour white,
in form hoary, in similitude like Southernwood, only broader and
longer; in taste rather salt than bitter, because it grows so near the
salt-water; at the joints, with the leaves toward the tops it bears
little yellow flowers; the root lies deep, and is woody.

_Common Wormwood_ I shall not describe, for every boy that can eat an
egg knows it.

_Roman Wormwood_; and why Roman, seeing it grows familiarly in England?
It may be so called, because it is good for a stinking breath, which
the Romans cannot be very free from, maintaining so many bad houses by
authority of his Holiness.

_Descript._] The stalks are slender, and shorter than the common
Wormwood by one foot at least; the leaves are more finely cut and
divided than they are, but something smaller; both leaves and stalks
are hoary, the flowers of a pale yellow colour; it is altogether like
the common Wormwood, save only in bigness, for it is smaller; in taste,
for it is not so bitter; in smell, for it is spicy.

_Place._] It grows upon the tops of the mountains (it seems ’tis
aspiring) there ’tis natural, but usually nursed up in gardens for the
use of the apothecaries in London.

_Time._] All Wormwoods usually flower in August, a little sooner or
later.

_Government and virtues._] Will you give me leave to be critical a
little? I must take leave. Wormwood is an herb of Mars, and if Pontanus
say otherwise, he is beside the bridge; I prove it thus: What delights
in martial places, is a martial herb; but Wormwood delights in martial
places (for about forges and iron works you may gather a cart-load
of it,) _ergo_, it is a martial herb. It is hot and dry in the first
degree, viz. just as hot as your blood, and no hotter. It remedies the
evils choler can inflict on the body of man by sympathy. It helps
the evils Venus and the wanton Boy produce, by antipathy; and it doth
something else besides. It cleanses the body of choler (who dares say
Mars doth no good?) It provokes urine, helps surfeits, or swellings
in the belly; it causes appetite to meat, because Mars rules the
attractive faculty in man: The sun never shone upon a better herb for
the yellow jaundice than this; Why should men cry out so much upon
Mars for an infortunate, (or Saturn either?) Did God make creatures to
do the creation a mischief? This herb testifies, that Mars is willing
to cure all diseases he causes; the truth is, Mars loves no cowards,
nor Saturn fools, nor I neither. Take of the flowers of Wormwood,
Rosemary, and Black Thorn, of each a like quantity, half that quantity
of saffron; boil this in Rhenish wine, but put it not in saffron till
it is almost boiled; This is the way to keep a man’s body in health,
appointed by Camerarius, in his book intitled _Hortus Medicus_, and
it is a good one too. Besides all this, Wormwood provokes the terms.
I would willingly teach astrologers, and make them physicians (if I
knew how) for they are most fitting for the calling; if you will not
believe me, ask Dr. Hippocrates, and Dr. Galen, a couple of gentlemen
that our college of physicians keep to vapour with, not to follow. In
this our herb, I shall give the pattern of a ruler, the sons of art
rough cast, yet as near the truth as the men of Benjamin could throw
a stone: Whereby, my brethren, the astrologers may know by a penny
how a shilling is coined: As for the college of physicians, they are
too stately to college or too proud to continue. They say a mouse is
under the dominion of the Moon, and that is the reason they feed in the
night; the house of the Moon is Cancer; rats are of the same nature
with mice, but they are a little bigger; Mars receives his fall in
Cancer, _ergo_, Wormwood being an herb of Mars, is a present remedy
for the biting of rats and mice. Mushrooms (I cannot give them the
title of Herba, Frutex, or Arbor) are under the dominion of Saturn,
(and take one time with another, they do as much harm as good;) if any
have poisoned himself by eating them, Wormwood, an herb of Mars, cures
him, because Mars is exalted in Capricorn, the house of Saturn, and
this it doth by sympathy, as it did the other by antipathy. Wheals,
pushes, black and blue spots, coming either by bruises or beatings.
Wormwood, an herb of Mars, helps, because Mars, (as bad you love him,
and as you hate him) will not break your head, but he will give you
a plaister. If he do but teach you to know yourselves, his courtesy
is greater than his discourtesy. The greatest antipathy between the
planets, is between Mars and Venus: one is hot, the other cold; one
diurnal, the other nocturnal; one dry, the other moist; their houses
are opposite, one masculine, the other feminine; one public, the other
private; one is valiant, the other effeminate; one loves the light, the
other hates it; one loves the field, the other sheets; then the throat
is under Venus, the quinsy lies in the throat, and is an inflammation
there; Venus rules the throat, (it being under Taurus her sign.) Mars
eradicates all diseases in the throat by his herbs (for wormwood is
one) and sends them to Egypt on an errand never to return more, this
done by antipathy. The eyes are under the Luminaries; the right eye of
a man, and the left eye of a woman the Sun claims dominion over: the
left eye of a man, and the right eye of a woman, are privileges of the
Moon, Wormwood, an herb of Mars cures both; what belongs to the Sun
by sympathy, because he is exalted in his house; but what belongs to
the Moon by antipathy, because he hath his fall in hers. Suppose a man
be bitten or stung by a martial creature, imagine a wasp, a hornet,
a scorpion, Wormwood, an herb of Mars, gives you a present cure; that
Mars, choleric as he is, hath learned that patience, to pass by your
evil speeches of him, and tells you by my pen, That he gives you no
affliction, but he gives you a cure; you need not run to Apollo, nor
Æsculapius; and if he was so choleric as you make him to be, he would
have drawn his sword for anger, to see the ill conditions of these
people that can spy his vices, and not his virtues. The eternal God,
when he made Mars, made him for public good, and the sons of men shall
know it in the latter end of the world. _Et cælum Mars solus babet._
You say Mars is a destroyer; mix a little Wormwood, an herb of Mars,
with your ink, neither rats nor mice touch the paper written with it,
and then Mars is a preserver. Astrologers think Mars causes scabs and
itch, and the virgins are angry with him, because wanton Venus told
them he deforms their skins; but, quoth Mars, my only desire is, they
should know themselves; my herb Wormwood will restore them to the
beauty they formerly had, and in that I will not come an inch behind my
opposite, Venus: for which doth the greatest evil, he that takes away
an innate beauty, and when he has done, knows how to restore it again?
or she that teaches a company of wanton lasses to paint their faces?
If Mars be in a Virgin, in the nativity, they say he causes the cholic
(it is well God hath set some body to pull down the pride of man.) He
in the Virgin troubles none with the cholic, but them that know not
themselves (for who knows himself, may easily know all the world.)
Wormwood, an herb of Mars, is a present cure for it; and whether it be
most like a Christian to love him for his good, or hate him for his
evil, judge ye. I had almost forgotten, that charity thinks no evil. I
was once in the Tower and viewed the wardrobe, and there was a great
many fine clothes: (I can give them no other title, for I was never
either linen or woolen draper) yet as brave as they looked, my opinion
was that the moths might consume them; moths are under the dominion of
Mars; this herb Wormwood being laid among cloaths, will make a moth
scorn to meddle with the cloaths, as much as a lion scorns to meddle
with a mouse, or an eagle with a fly. You say Mars is angry, and it is
true enough he is angry with many countrymen, for being such fools to
be led by the noses by the college of physicians, as they lead bears to
Paris garden. Melancholy men cannot endure to be wronged in point of
good fame, and that doth sorely trouble old Saturn, because they call
him the greatest infortunate; in the body of man he rules the spleen,
(and that makes covetous man so splenetic) the poor old man lies crying
out of his left side. Father Saturn’s angry, Mars comes to him; Come,
brother, I confess thou art evil spoken of, and so am I; thou knowest I
have my exaltation in thy house, I give him an herb of mine, Wormwood,
to cure the old man: Saturn consented, but spoke little, and so Mars
cured him by sympathy. When Mars was free from war, (for he loves to
be fighting, and is the best friend a soldier hath) I say, when Mars
was free from war, he called a council of war in his own brain, to know
how he should do poor sinful man good, desiring to forget his abuses in
being called an infortunate. He musters up his own forces, and places
them in battalia. Oh! quoth he, why do I hurt a poor silly man or
woman? His angel answers him, It is because they have offended their
God, (Look back to Adam:) Well, says Mars, though they speak evil of
me, I will do good to them; Death’s cold, my herb shall heat them: they
are full of ill humours (else they would never have spoken ill of me;)
my herb shall cleanse them, and dry them; they are poor weak creatures,
my herb shall strengthen them; they are dull witted, my herb shall
fortify their apprehensions; and yet among astrologers all this does
not deserve a good word: Oh the patience of Mars!

   _Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere caucas,
    Inque domus superum scandere cura facit._
    O happy he that can the knowledge gain,
    To know the eternal God made nought in vain.

    To this I add,

    I know the reason causeth such a dearth
    Of knowledge; ’tis because men love the earth.

The other day Mars told me he met with Venus, and he asked her, What
was the reason that she accused him for abusing women? He never gave
them the pox. In the dispute they fell out, and in anger parted, and
Mars told me that his brother Saturn told him, that an antivenerean
medicine was the best against the pox. Once a month he meets with the
Moon. Mars is quick enough of speech, and the Moon not much behind
hand, (neither are most women.) The Moon looks much after children, and
children are much troubled with the worms; she desired a medicine of
him, he bid her take his own herb, Wormwood. He had no sooner parted
with the Moon, but he met with Venus, and she was as drunk as a hog;
Alas! poor Venus, quoth he; What! thou a fortune, and be drunk? I’ll
give thee antipathetical cure; Take my herb Wormwood, and thou shall
never get a surfeit by drinking. A poor silly countryman hath got an
ague, and cannot go about his business: he wishes he had it not, and
so do I; but I will tell him a remedy, whereby he shall prevent it;
Take the herb of Mars, Wormwood, and if infortunes will do good, what
will fortunes do? Some think the lungs are under Jupiter; and if the
lungs then the breath; and though sometimes a man gets a stinking
breath, and yet Jupiter is a fortune, forsooth; up comes Mars to him;
Come brother Jupiter, thou knowest I sent thee a couple of trines to
thy house last night, the one from Aries, and the other from Scorpio;
give me thy leave by sympathy to cure this poor man with drinking a
draught of Wormwood beer every morning. The Moon was weak the other
day, and she gave a man two terrible mischiefs, a dull brain and a weak
sight; Mars laid by his sword, and comes to her; Sister Moon, said
he, this man hath angered thee, but I beseech thee take notice he is
but a fool; prithee be patient, I will with my herb wormwood cure him
of both infirmities by antipathy, for thou knowest thou and I cannot
agree; with that the Moon began to quarrel; Mars (not delighting much
in women’s tongues) went away, and did it whether she would or no.

He that reads this, and understands what he reads, hath a jewel of more
worth than a diamond; he that understands it not, is as little fit to
give physick. There lies a key in these words which will unlock, (if it
be turned by a wise hand) the cabinet of physick: I have delivered it
as plain as I durst; it is not only upon Wormwood as I wrote, but upon
all plants, trees, and herbs; he that understands it not, is unfit (in
my opinion) to give physic. This shall live when I am dead. And thus
I leave it to the world, not caring a farthing whether they like it
or dislike it. The grave equals all men, and therefore shall equal me
with all princes; until which time the eternal Providence is over me:
Then the ill tongue of a prating fellow, or one that hath more tongue
than wit, or more proud than honest, shall never trouble me. _Wisdom is
justified by her children._ And so much for Wormwood.


    YARROW, CALLED NOSE-BLEED, MILFOIL
    AND THOUSAND-LEAL.

_Descript._] IT hath many long leaves spread upon the ground, finely
cut, and divided into many small parts. Its flowers are white, but not
all of a whiteness and stayed in knots, upon divers green stalks which
rise from among the leaves.

_Place._] It is frequent in all pastures.

_Time._] It flowers late, even in the latter end of August.

_Government and virtues._] It is under the influence of Venus. An
ointment of them cures wounds, and is most fit for such as have
inflammations, it being an herb of Dame Venus; it stops the terms in
women, being boiled in white wine, and the decoction drank; as also the
bloody flux; the ointment of it is not only good for green wounds, but
also for ulcers and fistulas, especially such as abound with moisture.
It stays the shedding of hair, the head being bathed with the decoction
of it; inwardly taken it helps the retentive faculty of the stomach: it
helps the gonorrhea in men, and the whites in women, and helps such as
cannot hold their water; and the leaves chewed in the mouth eases the
tooth-ache, and these virtues being put together, shew the herb to be
drying and binding. Achilles is supposed to be the first that left the
virtues of this herb to posterity, having learned them of this master
Chiron, the Centaur; and certainly a very profitable herb it is in
cramps, and therefore called Militaris.




DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING SYRUPS, CONSERVES,

_&c._ _&c._


HAVING in divers places of this Treatise promised you the way of making
Syrups, Conserves, Oils, Ointments, &c., of herbs, roots, flowers, &c.
whereby you may have them ready for your use at such times when they
cannot be had otherwise; I come now to perform what I promised, and you
shall find me rather better than worse than my word.

That this may be done methodically, I shall divide my directions into
two grand sections, and each section into several chapters, and then
you shall see it look with such a countenance as this is.


SECTION I.

_Of gathering, drying, and keeping Simples, and their juices._

    CHAP. I.    _Of leaves of Herbs, &c._
    CHAP. II.   _Of Flowers._
    CHAP. III.  _Of Seeds._
    CHAP. IV.   _Of Roots._
    CHAP. V.    _Of Barks._
    CHAP. VI.   _Of Juices._


SECTION II.

_Of making and keeping Compounds._

    CHAP. I.    _Of distilled waters._
    CHAP. II.   _Of Syrups._
    CHAP. III.  _Of Juleps._
    CHAP IV.    _Of Decoctions._
    CHAP. V.    _Of Oils._
    CHAP. VI.   _Of Electuaries._
    CHAP. VII.  _Of Conserves._
    CHAP. VIII. _Of Preserves._
    CHAP. IX.   _Of Lohochs._
    CHAP. X.    _Of Ointments._
    CHAP. XI.   _Of Plaisters._
    CHAP. XII.  _Of Poultices._
    CHAP. XIII. _Of Troches._
    CHAP. XIV.  _Of Pills._
    CHAP. XV.   _The way of fitting Medicines to Compound Diseases._

    Of all these in order.




CHAPTER I.

_Of Leaves of Herbs, or Trees._


1. OF leaves, choose only such as are green, and full of juice; pick
them carefully, and cast away such as are any way declining, for they
will putrify the rest: So shall one handful be worth ten of those you
buy at the physic herb shops.

2. Note what places they most delight to grow in, and gather them
there; for Betony that grows in the shade, is far better than that
which grows in the Sun, because it delights in the shade; so also such
herbs as delight to grow near the water, shall be gathered near it,
though happily you may find some of them upon dry ground: The Treatise
will inform you where every herb delights to grow.

3. The leaves of such herbs as run up to seed, are not so good when
they are in flower as before (some few excepted, the leaves of which
are seldom or never used) in such cases, if through ignorance they were
not known, or through negligence forgotten, you had better take the top
and the flowers, then the leaf.

4. Dry them well in the Sun, and not in the shade, as the saying of
physicians is; for if the sun draw away the virtues of the herb, it
must need do the like by hay, by the same rule, which the experience of
every country farmer will explode for a notable piece of nonsense.

5. Such as are artists in astrology, (and indeed none else are fit to
make physicians) such I advise; let the planet that governs the herb be
angular, and the stronger the better; if they can, in herbs of Saturn,
let Saturn be in the ascendant; in the herbs of Mars, let Mars be in
the mid heaven, for in those houses they delight; let the Moon apply to
them by good aspect, and let her not be in the houses of her enemies;
if you cannot well stay till she apply to them, let her apply to a
planet of the same triplicity; if you cannot wait that time neither,
let her be with a fixed star of their nature.

6. Having well dried them, put them up in brown paper, sewing the paper
up like a sack, and press them not too hard together, and keep them in
a dry place near the fire.

7. As for the duration of dried herbs, a just time cannot be given, let
authors prate their pleasure; for,

1st. Such as grow upon dry grounds will keep better than such as grow
on moist.

2dly, Such herbs as are full of juice, will not keep so long as such as
are drier.

3dly. Such herbs as are well dried, will keep longer than such as are
slack dried. Yet you may know when they are corrupted, by their loss of
colour, or smell, or both; and if they be corrupted, reason will tell
you that they must needs corrupt the bodies of those people that take
them.

4. Gather all leaves in the hour of that planet that governs them.




CHAPTER II.

_Of Flowers._


1. THE flower, which is the beauty of the plant, and of none of the
least use in physick, grows yearly, and is to be gathered when it is in
its prime.

2. As for the time of gathering them, let the planetary hour, and the
planet they come of, be observed, as we shewed you in the foregoing
chapter: as for the time of the day, let it be when the sun shine upon
them, that so they may be dry; for, if you gather either flowers or
herbs when they are wet or dewy, they will not keep.

3. Dry them well in the sun, and keep them in papers near the fire, as
I shewed you in the foregoing chapter.

4. So long as they retain the colour and smell, they are good; either
of them being gone, so is the virtue also.




CHAPTER III.

_Of Seeds._


1. THE seed is that part of the plant which is endowed with a vital
faculty to bring forth its like, and it contains potentially the whole
plant in it.

2. As for place, let them be gathered from the place where they delight
to grow.

3. Let them be full ripe when they are gathered; and forget not the
celestial harmony before mentioned, for I have found by experience that
their virtues are twice as great at such times as others: “There is an
appointed time for every thing under the sun.”

4. When you have gathered them, dry them a little, and but a little in
the sun, before you lay them up.

5. You need not be so careful of keeping them so near the fire, as
the other before-mentioned, because they are fuller of spirit, and
therefore not so subject to corrupt.

6. As for the time of their duration, it is palpable they will keep a
good many years; yet, they are best the first year, and this I make
appear by a good argument. They will grow sooner the first year they be
set, therefore then they are in their prime; and it is an easy matter
to renew them yearly.




CHAPTER IV.

_Of Roots._


1. OF roots, chuse such as are neither rotten nor worm-eaten, but
proper in their taste, colour, and smell; such as exceed neither in
softness nor hardness.

2. Give me leave to be a little critical against the vulgar received
opinion, which is, That the sap falls down into the roots in the
Autumn, and rises again in the Spring, as men go to bed at night, and
rise in the morning; and this idle talk of untruth is so grounded in
the heads, not only of the vulgar, but also of the learned, that a
man cannot drive it out by reason. I pray let such sapmongers answer
me this argument; If the sap falls into the roots in the fall of the
leaf, and lies there all the Winter, then must the root grow only in
the Winter. But the root grows not at all in the Winter, as experience
teaches, but only in the Summer: Therefore, If you set an apple-kernel
in the Spring, you shall find the root to grow to a pretty bigness in
the Summer, and be not a whit bigger next Spring. What doth the sap do
in the root all that while? Pick straws? ’Tis as rotten as a rotten
post.

The truth is, when the sun declines from the tropic of Cancer, the sap
begins to congeal both in root and branch; when he touches the tropic
of Capricorn, and ascends to us-ward, it begins to wax thin again, and
by degrees, as it congealed. But to proceed.

3. The drier time you gather the roots in, the better they are; for
they have the less excrementitious moisture in them.

4. Such roots as are soft, your best way is to dry in the sun, or else
hang them in the chimney corner upon a string; as for such as are hard,
you may dry them any where.

5. Such roots as are great, will keep longer than such as are small;
yet most of them will keep a year.

6. Such roots as are soft, it is your best way to keep them always near
the fire, and to take this general rule for it: If in Winter-time you
find any of your roots, herbs or flowers begin to be moist, as many
times you shall (for it is your best way to look to them once a month)
dry them by a very gentle fire; or, if you can with convenience keep
them near the fire, you may save yourself the labour.

7. It is in vain to dry roots that may commonly be had, as Parsley,
Fennel, Plantain, &c. but gather them only for present need.




CHAPTER V

_Of Barks._


1. BARKS, which physicians use in medicine, are of these sorts: Of
fruits, of roots, of boughs.

2. The barks of fruits are to be taken when the fruit is full ripe,
as Oranges, Lemons, &c. but because I have nothing to do with exotics
here, I pass them without any more words.

3. The barks of trees are best gathered in the Spring, if of oaks, or
such great trees; because then they come easier off, and so you may dry
them if you please; but indeed the best way is to gather all barks only
for present use.

4. As for the barks of roots, ’tis thus to be gotten. Take the roots of
such herbs as have a pith in them, as parsley, fennel, &c. slit them in
the middle, and when you have taken out the pith (which you may easily
do) that which remains is called (tho’ improperly) the bark, and indeed
is only to be used.




CHAPTER VI.

_Of Juices._


1. JUICES are to be pressed out of herbs when they are young and
tender, out of some stalks and tender tops of herbs and plants, and
also out of some flowers.

2. Having gathered the herb, would you preserve the juice of it, when
it is very dry (for otherwise the juice will not be worth a button)
bruise it very well in a stone mortar with a wooden pestle, then having
put it into a canvas bag, the herb I mean, not the mortar, for that
will give but little juice, press it hard in a press, then take the
juice and clarify it.

3. The manner of clarifying it is this: Put it into a pipkin or
skillet, or some such thing, and set it over the fire; and when the
scum arises, take it off; let it stand over the fire till no more scum
arise; when you have your juice clarified, cast away the scum as a
thing of no use.

4. When you have thus clarified it, you have two ways to preserve it
all the year.

(1.) When it is cold, put it into a glass, and put so much oil on it as
will cover it to the thickness of two fingers; the oil will swim at the
top, and so keep the air from coming to putrify it: When you intend to
use it, pour it into a porringer, and if any oil come out with it, you
may easily scum it off with a spoon, and put the juice you use not into
the glass again, it will quickly sink under the oil. This is the first
way.

(2.) The second way is a little more difficult, and the juice of fruits
is usually preserved this way. When you have clarified it, boil it over
the fire, till (being cold) it be of the thickness of honey; This is
most commonly used for diseases of the mouth, and is called Roba and
Saba. And thus much for the first section, the second follows.




SECTION II.

_The way of making and keeping all necessary Compounds._




CHAPTER V.

_Of distilled Waters._


HITHERTO we have spoken of medicines which consist in their own nature,
which authors vulgarly call Simples, though sometimes improperly; for
in truth, nothing is simple but pure elements; all things else are
compounded of them. We come now to treat of the artificial medicines,
in the form of which (because we must begin somewhere) we shall place
distilled waters in which consider,

1. Waters are distilled of herbs, flowers, fruits, and roots.

2. We treat not of strong waters, but of cold, as being to act Galen’s
part, and not Paracelsus’s.

3. The herbs ought to be distilled when they are in the greatest
vigour, and so ought the flowers also.

4. The vulgar way of distillations which people use, because they know
no better, is in a pewter still; and although distilled waters are the
weakest of artificial medicines, and good for little but mixtures of
other medicines, yet they are weaker by many degrees, than they would
be were they distilled in sand. If I thought it not impossible, to
teach you the way of distilling in sand, I would attempt it.

5. When you have distilled your water, put it into a glass, covered
over with a paper pricked full of holes, so that the excrementitious
and fiery vapours may exhale, which cause that settling in distilled
waters called the Mother, which corrupt them, then cover it close, and
keep it for your use.

6. Stopping distilled waters with a cork, makes them musty, and so
does paper, if it but touch the water: it is best to stop them with a
bladder, being first put in water, and bound over the top of the glass.

Such cold waters as are distilled in a pewter still (if well kept) will
endure a year; such as are distilled in sand, as they are twice as
strong, so they endure twice as long.




CHAPTER II.

_Of Syrups._


1. A SYRUP is a medicine of a liquid form, composed of infusion,
decoction and juice. And, 1. For the more grateful taste. 2. For the
better keeping of it: with a certain quantity of honey or sugar,
hereafter mentioned, boiled to the thickness of new honey.

2. You see at the first view, That this aphorism divides itself into
three branches, which deserve severally to be treated of, viz.

    1. Syrups made by infusion.
    2. Syrups made by decoction.
    3. Syrups made by juice.

Of each of these, (for your instruction-sake, kind countrymen and
women) I speak a word or two apart.

1st, Syrups made by infusion, are usually made of flowers, and of such
flowers as soon lose their colour and strength by boiling, as roses,
violets, peach flowers, &c. They are thus made: Having picked your
flowers clean, to every pound of them add three pounds or three pints,
which you will (for it is all one) of spring water, made boiling hot;
first put your flowers into a pewter-pot, with a cover, and pour the
water on them; then shutting the pot, let it stand by the fire, to
keep hot twelve hours, and strain it out: (in such syrups as purge), as
damask roses, peach flowers, &c. the usual, and indeed the best way, is
to repeat this infusion, adding fresh flowers to the same liquor divers
times, that so it may be the stronger) having strained it out, put the
infusion into a pewter bason, or an earthen one well glazed, and to
every pint of it add two pounds of sugar, which being only melted over
the fire, without boiling, and scummed, will produce you the syrup you
desire.

2dly, Syrups made by decoction are usually made of compounds, yet may
any simple herb be thus converted into syrup: Take the herb, root,
or flowers you would make into a syrup, and bruise it a little; then
boil it in a convenient quantity of spring water; the more water you
boil it in, the weaker it will be; a handful of the herb or root is a
convenient quantity for a pint of water, boil it till half the water
be consumed, then let it stand till it be almost cold, and strain
it through a woollen cloth, letting it run out at leisure: without
pressing. To every pint of this decoction add one pound of sugar, and
boil it over the fire till it come to a syrup, which you may know, if
you now and then cool a little of it with a spoon: Scum it all the
while it boils, and when it is sufficiently boiled, whilst it is hot,
strain it again through a woollen cloth, but press it not. Thus you
have the syrup perfected.

3dly, Syrups made of juice, are usually made of such herbs as are full
of juice, and indeed they are better made into a syrup this way than
any other; the operation is thus: Having beaten the herb in a stone
mortar, with a wooden pestle, press out the juice, and clarify it, as
you are taught before in the juices; then let the juice boil away till
about a quarter of it be consumed; to a pint of this add a pound of
sugar, and when it is boiled, strain it through a woollen cloth, as we
taught you before, and keep it for your use.

3. If you make a syrup of roots that are any thing hard, as parsley,
fennel, and grass roots, &c. when you have bruised them, lay them in
steep some time in that water which you intend to boil them in hot, so
will the virtue the better come out.

4. Keep your syrups either in glasses or stone pots, and stop them not
with cork nor bladder, unless you would have the glass break, and the
syrup lost, only bind paper about the mouth.

5. All syrups, if well made, continue a year with some advantage; yet
such as are made by infusion, keep shortest.




CHAPTER III.

_Of Juleps._


1. JULEPS were first invented, as I suppose, in Arabia; and my reason
is, because the word Julep is an Arabic word.

2. It signifies only a pleasant potion, as is vulgarly used by such as
are sick, and want help, or such as are in health, and want no money
to quench thirst.

3. Now-a-day it is commonly used—

    1. To prepare the body for purgation.
    2. To open obstructions and the pores.
    3. To digest tough humours.
    4. To qualify hot distempers, &c.

4. Simple Juleps, (for I have nothing to say to compounds here) are
thus made; Take a pint of such distilled water, as conduces to the cure
of your distemper, which this treatise will plentifully furnish you
with, to which add two ounces of syrup, conducing to the same effect;
(I shall give you rules for it in the next chapter) mix them together,
and drink a draught of it at your pleasure. If you love tart things,
add ten drops of oil of vitriol to your pint, and shake it together,
and it will have a fine grateful taste.

5. All juleps are made for present use; and therefore it is in vain to
speak of their duration.




CHAPTER IV.

_Of Decoctions._


1. ALL the difference between decoctions, and syrups made by decoction,
is this; Syrups are made to keep, decoctions only for present use; for
you can hardly keep a decoction a week at any time; if the weather be
hot, not half so long.

2. Decoctions are made of leaves, roots, flowers, seeds, fruits or
barks, conducing to the cure of the disease you make them for; are made
in the same manner as we shewed you in syrups.

3. Decoctions made with wine last longer than such as are made with
water; and if you take your decoction to cleanse the passages of the
urine, or open obstructions, your best way is to make it with white
wine instead of water, because this is penetrating.

4. Decoctions are of most use in such diseases as lie in the passages
of the body, as the stomach, bowels, kidneys, passages of urine and
bladder, because decoctions pass quicker to those places than any other
form of medicines.

5. If you will sweeten your decoction with sugar, or any syrup fit for
the occasion you take it for, which is better, you may, and no harm.

6. If in a decoction, you boil both roots, herbs, flowers, and seed
together, let the roots boil a good while first, because they retain
their virtue longest; then the next in order by the same rule, _viz._
1. Barks. 2. The herbs. 3. The seeds. 4. The flowers. 5. The spices, if
you put any in, because their virtues come soonest out.

7. Such things as by boiling cause sliminess to a decoction, as figs,
quince-seed, linseed, &c. your best way is, after you have bruised
them, to tie them up in a linen rag, as you tie up calf’s brains, and
so boil them.

8. Keep all decoctions in a glass close stopped, and in the cooler
place you keep them, the longer they will last ere they be sour.

Lastly, The usual dose to be given at one time, is usually two, three,
four, or five ounces, according to the age and strength of the patient,
the season of the year, the strength of the medicine, and the quality
of the disease.




CHAPTER V.

_Of Oils._


1. OIL Olive, which is commonly known by the name of Sallad Oil, I
suppose, because it is usually eaten with sallads by them that love it,
if it be pressed out of ripe olives, according to Galen, is temperate,
and exceeds in no one quality.

2. Of oils, some are simple, and some are compound.

3 Simple oils, are such as are made of fruits or seeds by expression,
as oil of sweet and bitter almonds, linseed and rape-seed oil, &c. of
which see in my Dispensatory.

4. Compound oils, are made of oil of olives, and other simples, imagine
herbs, flowers, roots, &c.

5. The way of making them is this: Having bruised the herbs or flowers
you would make your oil of, put them into an earthen pot, and to two or
three handfuls of them pour a pint of oil, cover the pot with a paper,
set it in the sun about a fortnight or so, according as the sun is in
hotness; then having warmed it very well by the fire, press out the
herb, &c. very hard in a press, and add as many more herbs to the same
oil; bruise the herbs (I mean not the oil) in like manner, set them in
the sun as before; the oftener you repeat this, the stronger your oil
will be; At last when you conceive it strong enough, boil both herbs
and oil together, till the juice be consumed, which you may know by its
bubbling, and the herbs will be crisp; then strain it while it is hot,
and keep it in a stone or glass vessel for your use.

6. As for chymical oils, I have nothing to say here.

7. The general use of these oils, is for pains in the limbs, roughness
of the skin, the itch, &c. as also for ointments and plaisters.

8. If you have occasion to use it for wounds or ulcers, in two ounces
of oil, dissolve half an ounce of turpentine, the heat of the fire
will quickly do it; for oil itself is offensive to wounds, and the
turpentine qualifies it.




CHAPTER VI.

_Of Electuaries._


PHYSICIANS make more a quoil than needs by half, about electuaries.
I shall prescribe but one general way of making them up; as for
ingredients, you may vary them as you please, and as you find
occasion, by the last chapter.

1. That you may make electuaries when you need them, it is requisite
that you keep always herbs, roots, flowers, seeds, &c. ready dried in
your house, that so you may be in a readiness to beat them into powder
when you need them.

2. It is better to keep them whole than beaten; for being beaten,
they are more subject to lose their strength; because the air soon
penetrates them.

3. If they be not dry enough to beat into powder when you need them,
dry them by a gentle fire till they are so.

4. Having beaten them, sift them through a fine tiffany searce, that no
great pieces may be found in your electuary.

5. To one ounce of your powder add three ounces of clarified honey;
this quantity I hold to be sufficient. If you would make more or less
electuary, vary your proportion accordingly.

6. Mix them well together in a mortar, and take this for a truth, you
cannot mix them too much.

7. The way to clarify honey, is to set it over the fire in a convenient
vessel, till the scum rise, and when the scum is taken off, it is
clarified.

8. The usual dose of cordial electuaries, is from half a dram to two
drams; of purging electuaries, from half an ounce to an ounce.

9. The manner of keeping them is in a pot.

10. The time of taking them, is either in a morning fasting, and
fasting an hour after them; or at night going to bed, three or four
hours after supper.




CHAPTER VII.

_Of Conserves._


1. THE way of making conserves is two-fold, one of herbs and flowers,
and the other of fruits.

2. Conserves of herbs and flowers, are thus made: if you make your
conserves of herbs, as of scurvy-grass, wormwood, rue, and the like,
take only the leaves and tender tops (for you may beat your heart out
before you can beat the stalks small) and having beaten them, weigh
them, and to every pound of them add three pounds of sugar, you cannot
beat them too much.

3. Conserves of fruits, as of barberries, sloes and the like, is thus
made: First, Scald the fruit, then rub the pulp through a thick hair
sieve made for the purpose, called a pulping sieve; you may do it for a
need with the back of a spoon: then take this pulp thus drawn, and add
to it its weight of sugar, and no more; put it into a pewter vessel,
and over a charcoal fire; stir it up and down till the sugar be melted,
and your conserve is made.

4. Thus you have the way of making conserves; the way of keeping them
is in earthen pots.

5. The dose is usually the quantity of a nutmeg at a time morning and
evening, or (unless they are purging) when you please.

6. Of conserves, some keep many years, as conserves of roses: others
but a year, as conserves of Borage, Bugloss, Cowslips and the like.

7. Have a care of the working of some conserves presently after they
are made; look to them once a day, and stir them about; conserves of
Borage, Bugloss, Wormwood, have got an excellent faculty at that sport.

8. You may know when your conserves are almost spoiled by this; you
shall find a hard crust at top with little holes in it, as though worms
had been eating there.




CHAPTER VIII.

_Of Preserves._


OF Preserves are sundry sorts, and the operation of all being somewhat
different, we will handle them all apart. These are preserved with
sugar:

    1. Flowers.
    2. Fruits.
    3. Roots.
    4. Barks.

1. Flowers are very seldom preserved; I never saw any that I remember,
save only cowslip flowers, and that was a great fashion in Sussex when
I was a boy. It is thus done, Take a flat glass, we call them jat
glasses; strew on a laying of fine sugar, on that a laying of flowers,
and on that another laying of sugar, on that another laying of flowers,
so do till your glass be full; then tie it over with a paper, and in a
little time, you shall have very excellent and pleasant preserves.

There is another way of preserving flowers; namely, with vinegar and
salt, as they pickle capers and broom-buds; but as I have little skill
in it myself, I cannot teach you.

2. Fruits, as quinces, and the like, are preserved two ways;

(1.) Boil them well in water, and then pulp them through a sieve, as
we shewed you before; then with the like quantity of sugar, boil the
water they were boiled in into a syrup, viz. a pound of sugar to a pint
of liquor; to every pound of this syrup, add four ounces of the pulp;
then boil it with a very gentle fire to their right consistence, which
you may easily know if you drop a drop of it upon a trencher; if it be
enough, it will not stick to your fingers when it is cold.

(2.) Another way to preserve fruits is this; First, Pare off the rind;
then cut them in halves, and take out the core: then boil them in water
till they are soft; if you know when beef is boiled enough, you may
easily know when they are; Then boil the water with its like weight of
sugar into a syrup; put the syrup into a pot, and put the boiled fruit
as whole as you left it when you cut it into it, and let it remain
until you have occasion to use it.

3. Roots are thus preserved; First, Scrape them very clean, and cleanse
them from the pith, if they have any, for some roots have not, as
Eringo and the like; Boil them in water till they be soft, as we shewed
you before in the fruits; then boil the water you boiled the root in
into a syrup, as we shewed you before; then keep the root whole in the
syrup till you use them.

4. As for barks, we have but few come to our hands to be done, and of
those the few that I can remember, are, oranges, lemons, citrons, and
the outer bark of walnuts, which grow without-side the shell, for the
shells themselves would make but scurvy preserves; these be they I can
remember, if there be any more put them into the number.

The way of preserving these, is not all one in authors, for some are
bitter, some are hot; such as are bitter, say authors, must be soaked
in warm water, oftentimes changing till their bitter taste be fled; But
I like not this way and my reason is this; Because I doubt when their
bitterness is gone, so is their virtue also; I shall then prescribe one
common way, namely, the same with the former, _viz._ First, boil them
whole till they be soft, then make a syrup with sugar and the liquor
you boil them in, and keep the barks in the syrup.

5. They are kept in glasses or in glaz’d pots.

6. The preserved flowers will keep a year, if you can forbear eating of
them; the roots and barks much longer.

7. This art was plainly and first invented for delicacy, yet came
afterwards to be of excellent use in physic; For,

(1.) Hereby medicines are made pleasant for sick and squeamish
stomachs, which else would loath them.

(2.) Hereby they are preserved from decaying a long time.




CHAPTER IX.

_Of Lohocks._


1. THAT which the Arabians call Lohocks, and the Greeks Eclegma, the
Latins call Linctus, and in plain English signifies nothing else but a
thing to be licked up.

2. They are in body thicker than a syrup, and not so thick as an
electuary.

3. The manner of taking them is, often to take a little with a
liquorice stick, and let it go down at leisure.

4. They are easily thus made; Make a decoction of pectoral herbs, and
the treatise will furnish you with enough, and when you have strained
it, with twice its weight of honey or sugar, boil it to a lohock; if
you are molested with much phlegm, honey is better than sugar; and if
you add a little vinegar to it, you will do well; if not, I hold sugar
to be better than honey.

5. It is kept in pots, and may be kept a year and longer.

6. It is excellent for roughness of the wind-pipe, inflammations and
ulcers of the lungs, difficulty of breathing, asthmas, coughs, and
distillation of humours.




CHAPTER X.

_Of Ointments._


1. VARIOUS are the ways of making ointments, which authors have left
to posterity, which I shall omit, and quote one which is easiest to
be made, and therefore most beneficial to people that are ignorant in
physic, for whose sake I write this. It is thus done:

Bruise those herbs, flowers, or roots, you will make an ointment of,
and to two handfuls of your bruised herbs add a pound of hog’s grease
dried, or cleansed from the skins, beat them very well together in a
stone mortar with a wooden pestle, then put it into a stone pot, (the
herb and grease I mean, not the mortar,) cover it with a paper and set
it either in the sun, or some other warm place; three, four, or five
days, that it may melt; then take it out and boil it a little; then
whilst it is hot, strain it out, pressing it out very hard in a press:
to this grease add as many more herbs bruised as before; let them stand
in like manner as long, then boil them as you did the former; If you
think your ointment is not strong enough, you may do it the third and
fourth time; yet this I will tell you, the fuller of juice the herbs
are, the sooner will your ointment be strong; the last time you boil
it, boil it so long till your herbs be crisp, and the juice consumed,
then strain it pressing it hard in a press, and to every pound of
ointment add two ounces of turpentine, and as much wax, because grease
is offensive to wounds, as well as oil.

2. Ointments are vulgarly known to be kept in pots, and will last above
a year, some above two years.




CHAPTER XI.

_Of Plaisters._


1. THE Greeks made their plaisters of divers simples, and put metals
into the most of them, if not all; for having reduced their metals into
powder, they mixed them with that fatty substance whereof the rest of
the plaister consisted, whilst it was thus hot, continually stirring
it up and down, lest it should sink to the bottom; so they continually
stirred it till it was stiff; then they made it up in rolls, which when
they needed for use, they could melt by the fire again.

2. The Arabians made up theirs with oil and fat, which needed not so
long boiling.

3. The Greeks emplaisters consisted of these ingredients, metals,
stones, divers sorts of earth, feces, juices, liquors, seeds, roots,
herbs, excrements of creatures, wax, rosin, gums.




CHAPTER XII.

_Of Poultices._


1. POULTICES are those kind of things which the Latins call
_Cataplasmata_, and our learned fellows, that if they can read English,
that’s all, call them Cataplasms, because ’tis a crabbed word few
understand; it is indeed a very fine kind of medicine to ripen sores.

2. They are made of herbs and roots, fitted for the disease, and
members afflicted, being chopped small, and boiled in water almost to
a jelly; then by adding a little barleymeal, or meal of lupins, and a
little oil, or rough sweet suet, which I hold to be better, spread upon
a cloth and apply to the grieved places.

3. Their use is to ease pain, to break sores, to cool inflammations,
to dissolve hardness, to ease the spleen, to concoct humours, and
dissipate swellings.

4. I beseech you take this caution along with you; Use no poultices (if
you can help it) that are of an healing nature, before you have first
cleansed the body, because they are subject to draw the humours to them
from every part of the body.




CHAPTER XIII.

_Of Troches._


1. THE Latins call them _Placentula_, or little cakes, and the Greeks
_Prochikois_, _Kukliscoi_, and _Artiscoi_; they are usually little
round flat cakes, or you may make them square if you will.

2. Their first invention was, that powders being so kept might resist
the intermission of air, and so endure pure the longer.

3. Besides, they are easier carried in the pockets of such as travel;
as many a man (for example) is forced to travel whose stomach is too
cold, or at least not so hot as it should be, which is most proper,
for the stomach is never cold till a man be dead; in such a case, it
is better to carry troches of wormwood, or galangal, in a paper in his
pocket, than to lay a gallipot along with him.

4. They are made thus; At night when you go to bed, take two drams of
fine gum tragacanth; put it into a gallipot, and put half a quarter of
a pint of any distilled water fitting for the purpose you would make
your troches for to cover it, and the next morning you shall find it in
such a jelly as the physicians call mucilage; With this you may (with
a little pains taken) make a powder into a paste, and that paste into
cakes called troches.

5. Having made them, dry them in the shade, and keep them in a pot for
your use.




CHAPTER XIV.

_Of Pills._


1. THEY are called _Pilulæ_, because they resemble little balls; the
Greeks call them _Catapotia_.

2. It is the opinion of modern physicians, that this way of making
medicines, was invented only to deceive the palate, that so by
swallowing them down whole, the bitterness of the medicine might not be
perceived, or at least it might not be unsufferable: and indeed most of
their pills, though not all, are very bitter.

3. I am of a clean contrary opinion to this. I rather think they
were done up in this hard form, that so they might be the longer in
digesting; and my opinion is grounded upon reason too, not upon fancy,
or hearsay. The first invention of pills was to purge the head, now, as
I told you before, such infirmities as lie near the passages were best
removed by decoctions, because they pass to the grieved part soonest;
so here, if the infirmity lies in the head, or any other remote part,
the best way is to use pills, because they are longer in digestion,
and therefore the better able to call the offending humour to them.

4. If I should tell you here a long tale of medicine working by
sympathy and antipathy, you would not understand a word of it: They
that are set to make physicians may find it in the treatise. All modern
physicians know not what belongs to a sympathetical cure, no more than
a cuckow what belongs to flats and sharps in music, but follow the
vulgar road, and call it a hidden quality, because ’tis hidden from the
eyes of dunces, and indeed none but astrologers can give a reason for
it; and physic without reason is like a pudding without fat.

5. The way to make pills is very easy, for with the help of a pestle
and mortar, and a little diligence, you may make any powder into pills,
either with syrup, or the jelly I told you before.




CHAPTER XV.

    _The way of mixing Medicines according to the Cause of the
    Disease, and Parts of the Body afflicted._


THIS being indeed the key of the work, I shall be somewhat the more
diligent in it. I shall deliver myself thus;

1. To the Vulgar.

2. To such as study Astrology; or such as study physic astrologically.

1st, To the Vulgar. Kind souls, I am sorry it hath been your hard
mishap to have been so long trained in such Egyptian darkness which to
your sorrow may be felt; The vulgar road of physic is not my practice,
and I am therefore the more unfit to give you advice. I have now
published a little book, (_Galen’s Art of Physic_,) which will fully
instruct you, not only in the knowledge of your own bodies, but also
in fit medicines to remedy each part of it when afflicted; in the mean
season take

1. With the disease, regard the cause, and the part of the body
afflicted; for example, suppose a woman be subject to miscarry, through
wind, thus do;

(1.) Look Abortion in the table of diseases, and you shall be directed
by that, how many herbs prevent miscarriage.

(2.) Look Wind in the same table, and you shall see how many of these
herbs expel wind.

These are the herbs medicinal for your grief.

2. In all diseases strengthen the part of the body afflicted.

3. In mix’d diseases there lies some difficulty, for sometimes two
parts of the body are afflicted with contrary humours, as sometimes the
liver is afflicted with choler and water, as when a man hath both the
dropsy and the yellow-jaundice; and this is usually mortal.

In the former, Suppose the brain be too cool and moist, and the liver
be too hot and dry; thus do;

1. Keep your head outwardly warm.

2. Accustom yourself to the smell of hot herbs.

3. Take a pill that heats the head at night going to bed.

4. In the morning take a decoction that cools the liver, for that
quickly passes the stomach, and is at the liver immediately.

You must not think, courteous people, that I can spend time to give you
examples of all diseases; These are enough to let you see so much light
as you without art are able to receive; If I should set you to look at
the sun, I should dazzle your eyes, and make you blind.

2dly, To such as study Astrology, (who are the only men I know that are
fit to study physic, physic without astrology being like a lamp without
oil) you are the men I exceedingly respect, and such documents as my
brain can give you at present (being absent from my study) I shall give
you.

1. Fortify the body with herbs of the nature of the Lord of the
Ascendant, ’tis no matter whether he be a Fortune or Infortune in this
case.

2. Let your medicine be something antipathetical to the Lord of the
sixth.

3. Let your medicine be something of the nature of the sign ascending.

4. If the Lord of the Tenth be strong, make use of his medicines.

5. If this cannot well be, make use of the medicines of the Light of
Time.

6. Be sure always to fortify the grieved part of the body by
sympathetical remedies.

7. Regard the heart, keep that upon the wheels, because the Sun is the
foundation of life, and therefore those universal remedies, _Aurum
Potabile_, and the Philosopher’s Stone, cure all diseases by fortifying
the heart.




THE

ENGLISH PHYSICIAN

AND

FAMILY DISPENSATORY.


AN ASTROLOGO-PHYSICAL DISCOURSE OF THE HUMAN VIRTUES IN THE BODY OF
MAN; BOTH PRINCIPAL AND ADMINISTERING.


HUMAN virtues are either PRINCIPAL for _procreation, and conservation_;
or ADMINISTRING, for _Attraction, Digestion, Retention, or Expulsion_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Virtues _conservative_, are Vital, Natural, and Animal.

By the _natural_ are bred Blood, Choler, Flegm, and Melancholy.

The _animal virtue_ is Intellective, and Sensitive.

The _Intellective_ is Imagination, Judgment, and Memory.

The _sensitive_ is Common, and Particular.

The _particular_ is Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling.

THE scope of this discourse is, To preserve in soundness and vigour,
the mind and understanding of man; to strengthen the brain, preserve
the body in health, to teach a man to be an able co-artificer, or
helper of nature, to withstand and expel Diseases.

I shall touch only the principal faculties both of body and mind; which
being kept in a due decorum, preserve the body in health, and the mind
in vigour.

I shall in this place speak of them only in the general, as they are
laid down to your view in the _Synopsis_, in the former pages, and in
the same order.

_Virtue Procreative._] The first in order, is the Virtue Procreative:
for natural regards not only the conservation of itself, but to beget
its like, and conserve in _Species_.

The seat of this is the Member of Generation, and is governed
principally by the influence of _Venus_.

It is augmented and encreased by the strength of _Venus_, by her Herbs,
Roots, Trees, Minerals, &c.

It is diminished and purged by those of _Mars_, and quite extinguished
by those of _Saturn_.

Observe the hour and Medicines of _Venus_, to fortify; of _Mars_, to
cleanse this virtue; of _Saturn_, to extinguish it.

_Conservative._] The conservative virtue is Vital, Natural, Animal.

_Vital._] The Vital spirit hath its residence in the heart, and is
dispersed from it by the Arteries; and is governed by the influence
of the Sun. And it is to the body, as the Sun is to the Creation; as
the heart is in the _Microcosm_, so is the Sun in the _Megacosm_: for
as the Sun gives life, light, and motion to the Creation, so doth the
heart to the body; therefore it is called _Sol Corporis_, as the Sun is
called _Cor Cœli_, because their operations are similar.

Inimical and destructive to this virtue, are _Saturn_ and _Mars_.

The Herbs and Plants of _Sol_, wonderfully fortify it.

_Natural._] The natural faculty or virtue resides in the liver, and is
generally governed by _Jupiter_, _Quasi Juvans Pater_; its office is to
nourish the body, and is dispersed through the body by the veins.

From this are bred four particular humours, _Blood, Choler, Flegm, and
Melancholy_.

_Blood_ is made of meat perfectly concocted, in quality hot and moist,
governed by _Jupiter_: It is by a third concoction transmuted into
flesh, the superfluity of it into seed, and its receptacle is the
veins, by which it is dispersed through the body.

_Choler_ is made of meat more than perfectly concocted; and it is
the spume or froth of blood: it clarifies all the humours, heats the
body, nourishes the apprehension, as blood doth the judgment: It is in
quality hot and dry; fortifies the attractive faculty, as blood doth
the digestive; moves man to activity and valour: its receptacle is the
gall, and it is under the influence of _Mars_.

_Flegm_ is made of meat not perfectly digested; it fortifies the virtue
expulsive, makes the body slippery, fit for ejection; it fortifies the
brain by its consimilitude with it; yet it spoils apprehension by its
antipathy to it: It qualifies choler, cools and moistens the heart,
thereby sustaining it, and the whole body, from the fiery effects,
which continual motion would produce. Its receptacle is the lungs,
and is governed by _Venus_, some say by the _Moon_, perhaps it may be
governed by them both, it is cold and moist in quality.

_Melancholy_ is the sediment of blood, cold and dry in quality,
fortifying the retentive faculty, and memory; makes men sober, solid,
and staid, fit for study; stays the unbridled toys of lustful blood,
stays the wandering thoughts, and reduces them home to the centre: its
receptacle is in the spleen, and it is governed by _Saturn_.

Of all these humours blood is the chief, all the rest are superfluities
of blood; yet are they necessary superfluities, for without any of
them, man cannot live.

Namely; Choler is the fiery superfluities; Flegm, the Watery;
Melancholy, the Earthly.

_Animal._] The third principal virtue remains, which is Animal; its
residence is in the brain, and _Mercury_ is the general significator of
it. _Ptolomy_ held the _Moon_ signified the Animal virtue; and I am of
opinion, both _Mercury_ and the _Moon_ dispose it; and my reason is,
1, Because both of them in nativities, either fortify, or impedite it.
2, Ill directions to either, or from either, afflict it, as good ones
help it. Indeed the _Moon_ rules the bulk of it, as also the sensitive
part of it: _Mercury_ the rational part: and that’s the reason, if in
a nativity the _Moon_ be stronger than _Mercury_, sense many times
over-powers reason; but if _Mercury_ be strong, and the _Moon_ weak,
reason will be master ordinarily in despite of sense.

It is divided into Intellective, and Sensitive.

1. _Intellective._] The Intellectual resides in the brain, within the
_Pia mater_, is governed generally by _Mercury_.

It is divided into Imagination, Judgment, and Memory.

_Imagination_ is seated in the forepart of the brain; it is hot and
dry in quality, quick, active, always working; it receives vapours
from the heart, and coins them into thoughts: it never sleeps, but
always is working, both when the man is sleeping and waking; only when
Judgment is awake it regulates the Imagination, which runs at random
when Judgment is asleep, and forms any thought according to the nature
of the vapour sent up to it. _Mercury_ is out of question the disposer
of it.

A man may easily perceive his Judgment asleep before himself many
times, and then he shall perceive his thoughts run at random.

Judgment always sleeps when men do, Imagination never sleeps; Memory
sometimes sleeps when men sleep, and sometimes it doth not: so then
when memory is awake, and the man asleep, then memory remembers what
apprehension coins, and that is a dream: The thoughts would have been
the same, if memory had not been awake to remember it.

These thoughts are commonly (I mean in sleep, when they are purely
natural,) framed according to the nature of the humour, called
complexion, which is predominate in the body; and if the humour be
peccant it is always so.

So that it is one of the surest rules to know a man’s own complexion,
by his dreams, I mean a man void of distractions, or deep studies:
(this most assuredly shews _Mercury_ to dispose of the Imagination,
as also because it is mutable, applying itself to any object, as
_Mercury’s_ nature is to do;) for then the imagination will follow its
old bent; for if a man be bent upon a business, his apprehension will
work as much when he is asleep, and find out as many truths by study,
as when the man is awake; and perhaps more too, because then it is not
hindered by ocular objects.

And thus much for imagination, which is governed by _Mercury_, and
fortified by his influence; and is also strong or weak in man,
according as _Mercury_ is strong or weak in the nativity.

_Judgment_ is seated in the midst of the brain, to shew that it ought
to bear rule over all the other faculties: it is the judge of the
little world, to approve of what is good, and reject what is bad; it is
the seat of reason, and the guide of actions; so that all failings are
committed through its infirmity, it not rightly judging between a real
and an apparent good. It is hot and moist in quality, and under the
influence of _Jupiter_.

_Memory_ is seated in the hinder cell of the brain, it is the great
register to the little world; and its office is to record things either
done and past, or to be done.

It is in quality cold and dry, melancholic, and therefore generally
melancholic men have best memories, and most tenacious every way. It is
under the dominion of _Saturn_, and is fortified by his influence, but
purged by the luminaries.

2. _Sensitive._] The second part of the animal virtue, is sensitive,
and it is divided into two parts, common and particular.

Common sense is an imaginary term, and that which gives virtue to all
the particular senses, and knits and unites them together within the
_Pia Mater_. It is regulated by _Mercury_, (perhaps this is one reason
why men are so fickle-headed) and its office is to preserve a harmony
among the senses.

Particular senses are five, _viz._ _seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting,
and feeling_.

These senses are united in one, in the brain, by the common sense, but
are operatively distinguished into their several seats, and places of
residence.

The _sight_ resides in the eyes, and particularly in the christaline
humour. It is in quality cold and moist, and governed by the
luminaries. They who have them weak in their genesis, have always weak
sights; if one of them be so, the weakness possesses but one eye.

The _hearing_ resides in the ears; is in quality, cold and dry,
melancholy, and under the dominion of _Saturn_.

The _smelling_ resides in the nose, is in quality hot and dry,
choleric, and that is the reason choleric creatures have so good
smells, as dogs. It is under the influence of _Mars_.

The _taste_ resides in the palate, which is placed at the root of the
tongue on purpose to discern what food is congruous for the stomach,
and what not; as the meseraik veins are placed to discern what
nourishment is proper for the liver to convert into blood. In some very
few men, and but a few, and in those few, but in few instances these
two tasters agree not, and that is the reason some men covet meats that
make them sick, _viz._ the taste craves them, and the meseraik veins
reject them: In quality hot and moist, and is ruled by _Jupiter_.

The _feeling_ is deputed to no particular organ, but is spread abroad,
over the whole body; is of all qualities, hot, cold, dry, and moist,
and is the index of all tangible things; for if it were only hot alone,
it could not feel a quality contrary, _viz._ cold, and this might be
spoken of other qualities. It is under the dominion of _Venus_, some
say, _Mercury_: A thousand to one, but it is under _Mercury_.


The four ADMINISTERING VIRTUES are, _attractive, digestive, retentive,
and expulsive_.

The _attractive_ virtue is hot and dry, hot by quality, active, or
principal, and that appears because the fountain of all heat is
attractive, _viz._ the sun. Dry by a quality passive, or an effect of
its heat; its office is to remain in the body, and call for what nature
wants.

It is under the influence of the _Sun_, say authors, and not under
_Mars_, because he is of a corrupting nature, yet if we cast an
impartial eye upon experience, we shall find, that martial men call
for meat none of the least, and for drink the most of all other men,
although many times they corrupt the body by it, and therefore I see
no reason why _Mars_ being of the same quality with the _Sun_, should
not have a share in the dominion. It is in vain to object, that the
influence of _Mars_ is evil, and therefore he should have no dominion
over this virtue; for then,

1. By the same rule, he should have no dominion at all in the body of
man.

2. All the virtues in man are naturally evil, and corrupted by _Adam’s_
fall.

This _attractive_ virtue ought to be fortified when the _Moon_ is in
fiery signs, _viz._ _Aries_ and _Sagitary_, but not in _Leo_, for the
sign is so violent, that no physic ought to be given when the _Moon_ is
there: (and why not _Leo_, seeing that is the most attractive sign of
all; and that’s the reason such as have it ascending in their genesis,
are such greedy eaters.) If you cannot stay till the _Moon_ be in one
of them, let one of them ascend when you administer the medicine.

The _digestive_ virtue is hot and moist, and is the principal of them
all, the other like handmaids attend it.

The _attractive_ virtue draws that which it should digest, and serves
continually to feed and supply it.

The _retentive_ virtue, retains the substance with it, till it be
perfectly digested.

The _expulsive_ virtue casteth out, expels what is superfluous by
digestion. It is under the influence of _Jupiter_, and fortified by his
herbs and plants, &c. In fortifying it, let your _Moon_ be in _Gemini_,
_Aquary_, or the first half of _Libra_, or if matters be come to that
extremity, that you cannot stay till that time, let one of them ascend,
but both of them together would do better, always provided that the
_Moon_ be not in the ascendent. I cannot believe the _Moon_ afflicts
the ascendent so much as they talk of, if she be well dignified, and in
a sign she delights in.

The _retentive_ virtue is in quality cold and dry; cold, because the
nature of cold is to compress, witness the ice; dry, because the nature
of dryness, is to keep and hold what is compressed. It is under the
influence of _Saturn_, and that is the reason why usually Saturnine men
are so covetous and tenacious. In fortifying of it, make use of the
herbs and plants, &c. of _Saturn_, and let the _Moon_ be in _Taurus_
or _Virgo_, _Capricorn_ is not so good, say authors, (I can give no
reason for that neither;) let not _Saturn_ nor his ill aspect molest
the ascendent.

The _expulsive_ faculty is cold and moist; cold because that compasses
the superfluities; moist, because that makes the body slippery and
fit for ejection, and disposes it to it. It is under the dominion of
_Luna_, with whom you may join _Venus_, because she is of the same
nature.

Also in whatsoever is before written, of the nature of the planets,
take notice, that fixed stars of the same nature, work the same effect.

In fortifying this, (which ought to be done in all purgations,) let
the _Moon_ be in _Cancer_, _Scorpio_, or _Pisces_, or let one of these
signs ascend.

_Although I did what I could throughout the whole book to express
myself in such a language as might be understood by all, and therefore
avoided terms of art as much as might be, Yet, 1. Some words of
necessity fall in which need explanation. 2. It would be very tedious
at the end of every receipt to repeat over and over again, the way of
administration of the receipt, or ordering your bodies after it, or to
instruct you in the mixture of medicines, and indeed would do nothing
else but stuff the book full of tautology._

_To answer to both these is my task at this time._

_To the first: The words which need explaining, such as are obvious to
my eye, are these that follow._

_1. To distil in _Balneo Mariæ_, is the usual way of distilling
in water. It is no more than to place your glass body which holds the
matter to be distilled in a convenient vessel of water, when the water
is cold (for fear of breaking) put a wisp of straw, or the like under
it, to keep it from the bottom, then make the water boil, that so the
spirit may be distilled forth; take not the glass out till the water be
cold again, for fear of breaking: It is impossible for a man to learn
how to do it, unless he saw it done._

2. _Manica Hippocrates_, Hippocrates’s sleeve, is a piece of woolen
cloth, new and white, sewed together in form of a sugar-loaf. Its use
is, to strain any syrup or decoction through, by pouring it into it,
and suffering it to run through without pressing or crushing it.

3. _Calcination_, is a burning of a thing in a crucible or other such
convenient vessel that will endure the fire. A crucible is such a thing
as goldsmiths melt silver in, and founders metals; you may place it in
the midst of the fire, with coals above, below, and on every side of it.

4. _Filtrition_, is straining of a liquid body through a brown paper:
make up the paper in form of a funnel, the which having placed in a
funnel, and the funnel and the paper in it in an empty glass, pour in
the liquor you would filter, and let it run through at its leisure.

5. _Coagulation_, is curdling or hardening: it is used in physic for
reducing a liquid body to hardness by the heat of the fire.

6. Whereas you find _vital_, _natural_, and _animal spirits_ often
mentioned in the virtues or receipts, I shall explain what they be, and
what their operation is in the body of man.

The actions or operations of the animal virtues, are, 1. _sensitive_,
2. _motive_.

The sensitive is, 1. _external_, 2. _internal_.

The external senses are, 1. _seeing_, 2. _hearing_, 3. _tasting_, 4.
_smelling_, 5. _feeling_.

The internal senses are, 1. _the Imagination, to apprehend a thing_. 2.
_Judgment, to judge of it_. 3. _Memory, to remember it_.

The seat of all these is in the brain.

The _vital spirits_ proceed from the heart, and cause in man _mirth_,
_joy_, _hope_, _trust_, _humanity_, _mildness_, _courage_, _&c._ and
their opposite: _viz._ _sadness_, _fear_, _care_, _sorrow_, _despair_,
_envy_, _hatred_, _stubbornness_, _revenge_, _&c._ by heat natural or
not natural.

The _natural spirit_ nourishes the body throughout (as the vital
quickens it, and the animal gives it sense and motion) its office is to
alter or concoct food into chile, chile into blood, blood into flesh,
to form, engender, nourish, and increase the body.

7. _Infusion_, is to steep a gross body into one more liquid.

8. _Decoction_, is the liquor in which any thing is boiled.

As for the manner of using or ordering the body after any sweating,
or purging medicines, or pills, or the like, they will be found in
different parts of the work, as also in the next page.

The different forms of making up medicines, as some into syrups,
others into electuaries, pills, troches, &c. was partly to please
the different palates of people, that so medicines might be more
delightful, or at least less burdensome. You may make the mixtures
of them in what form you please, only for your better instruction at
present, accept of these few lines.

1. Consider, that all diseases are cured by their contraries, but all
parts of the body maintained by their likes: then if heat be the cause
of the disease, give the cold medicine appropriated to it; if wind, see
how many medicines appropriated to that disease expel wind, and use
them.

2. Have a care you use not such medicines to one part of your body
which are appropriated to another, for if your brain be over heated,
and you use such medicines as cool the heart or liver, you may make bad
work.

3. The distilled water of any herb you would take for a disease, is a
fit mixture for the syrup of the same herb, or to make any electuary
into a drink, if you affect such liquid medicines best; if you have not
the distilled water, make use of the decoction.

4. Diseases that lie in the parts of the body remote from the stomach
and bowels, it is in vain to think to carry away the cause at once, and
therefore you had best do it by degrees; pills, and such like medicines
which are hard in the body, are fittest for such a business, because
they are longest before they digest.

5. Use no strong medicines, if weak will serve the turn, you had better
take one too weak by half, than too strong in the least.

6. Consider the natural temper of the part of the body afflicted, and
maintain it in that, else you extinguish nature, as the heart is hot,
the brain cold, or at least the coldest part of the body.

7. Observe this general rule; That such medicines as are hot in the
first degree are most habitual to our bodies, because they are just of
the heat of our blood.

8. All opening medicines, and such as provoke urine or the menses, or
break the stone, may most conveniently be given in white wine, because
white wine of itself is of an opening nature, and cleanses the veins.

9. Let all such medicines as are taken to stop fluxes or looseness, be
taken before meat, about an hour before, more or less, that so they may
strengthen the digestion and retentive faculty, before the food come
into the stomach, but such as are subject to vomit up their meat, let
them take such medicines as stay vomiting presently after meat, at the
conclusion of their meals, that so they may close up the mouth of the
stomach; and that is the reason why usually men eat a bit of cheese
after meat, because by its sourness and binding it closes the mouth of
the stomach, thereby staying belching and vomiting.

10. In taking purges be very careful, and that you may be so, observe
these rules.

(1.) Consider what the humour offending is, and let the medicine be
such as purges that humour, else you will weaken nature, not the
disease.

(2.) Take notice, if the humour you would purge out be thin, then
gentle medicines will serve the turn, but if it be tough and viscous,
then such medicines as are cutting and opening, the night before you
would take the purge.

(3.) In purging tough humours, forbear as much as may be such medicines
as leave a binding quality behind them.

(4.) Have a care of taking purges when your body is astringent; your
best way, is first to open it by a clyster.

(5.) In taking opening medicines, you may safely take them at night,
eating but a little supper three or four hours before, and the next
morning drinking a draught of warm posset-drink, and you need not
fear to go about your business. In this manner you may take _Lenitive
Electuary_, _Diacatholicon_, _Pulp of Cassia_, and the like gentle
electuaries, as also all pills that have neither _Diagrydium_ nor
_Colocynthus_, in them. But all violent purges require a due ordering
of the body; such ought to be taken in the morning after you are up,
and not to sleep after them before they are done working, at least
before night: two hours after you have taken them, drink a draught
of warm posset-drink, or broth, and six hours after eat a bit of
mutton, often walking about the chamber; let there be a good fire in
the chamber, and stir not out of the chamber till the purge have done
working, or not till next day.

Lastly, Take sweating medicines when you are in bed, covered warm, and
in the time of your sweating drink posset-drink as hot as you can. If
you sweat for a fever, boil sorrel and red sage in your posset-drink,
sweat an hour or longer if your strength will permit, then (the chamber
being kept very warm) shift yourself all but your head, about which
(the cap which you sweat in being still kept on) wrap a napkin very
hot, to repel the vapours back.

I confess these, or many of these directions may be found in one place
of the book or other, and I delight as little to write tautology as
another, but considering it might make for the public good, I inserted
them in this place: if, notwithstanding, any will be so mad as to do
themselves a mischief, the fault is not mine.


    ROOTS.

_Acanths, Brancæ Ursinæ._ Of bearsbreech, or brankursine, it is meanly
hot and dry, helps aches and numness of the joints, and is of a binding
quality, good for wounds and broken bones. _Dioscorides_ saith, they
are profitable for ruptures, or such as are bursten, or burnt with
fire, a dram of the root in powder being taken in the morning fasting,
in a decoction made with the same root and water.

_Acori, Veri, Perigrini, vulgaris, &c._ See _Calamus Aromaticus_. I
shall not speak concerning the several sorts of it, one of which is
Water-flag, or Flower-de-luce, which is hot and dry in the second
degree, binds, strengthens, stops fluxes of the belly, and immoderate
flowing of the menses, a dram being taken in red wine every morning.

_Allium._ Garlic. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, breeds
corrupt blood, yet is an enemy to all poisons, and such as are bitten
by cold venomous beasts, viz. Adders, Toads, Spiders, &c. it provokes
urine, and expels wind.

_Alcannæ._ Of privet. See the leaves.

_Althææ._ Of Marsh mallows, are meanly hot, of a digesting, softening
nature, ease pains, help bloody fluxes, the stone, and gravel; being
bruised and boiled in milk, and the milk drank, is a good remedy for
gripings of the belly, and the bloody flux. If a fever accompany the
disease, boil a handful of common mallow leaves with a handful of these
roots.

_Angelicæ._ Of Angelica; is hot and dry in the third degree,
strengthens the heart, and is good against pestilence and poison, half
a dram taken in the morning fasting.

_Anchusæ._ Of Alkanet; cold and dry, binding, good for old ulcers.

_Anthoræ._ A foreign root, the counterpoison for Monkshood, it is an
admirable remedy for the wind cholic, and resists poison.

_Apii._ Of smallage. See the barks.

_Aristolochiæ._ Of birthwort; of which are three sorts, long, round,
and climing: All hot and dry in the third degree. The long, being
drank in wine, brings away both birth and after-birth, and whatsoever
a careless midwife hath left behind. _Dioscorides, Galen._ The round,
being drank with wine, helps (besides the former) stuffings of the
lungs, hardness of the spleen, ruptures, convulsions; both of them
resist poison. I never read any use of the climing birthwort.

_Artanitæ, Cyclaminis, &c._ Or Sowbread; hot and dry in the third
degree, a most violent purge, dangerous; outwardly applied to the
place, it profits much in the bitings of venomous beasts, also being
hung about women in labour, it causes speedy deliverance. See the Herb.

_Arundinis, Vallanoriæ, and Saccharinæ._ Of common reeds and sugar
reeds. The roots of common reeds applied to the place draw out thorns,
and ease sprains; the ashes of them mixed with vinegar, take scurf, or
dandrif off from the head, and prevent the falling off of the hair,
they are hot and dry in the second degree, according to _Galen_. I
never read any virtue of the root of sugar cane.

_Ari, &c._ Of Cuckow-points, or Wake-Robin, hot and dry in the third
degree, I know no great good they do inwardly taken, unless to play the
rogue withal, or make sport: outwardly applied, they take off scurf,
morphew, or freckles from the face, clear the skin, and ease the pains
of the gout.

_Asclepiadis, vincetoxici._ Of Swallow-wort, hot and dry, good against
poison, and gripings of the belly, as also against the bitings of mad
dogs, taken inwardly.

_Asari._ Of Asarabacca: the roots are a safer purge than the leaves,
and not so violent, they purge by vomit, stool, and urine; they are
profitable for such as have agues, dropsies, stoppings of the liver, or
spleen, green sickness.

_Asparagi._ Of Asparagus, or sperage: they are temperate in quality,
opening, they provoke urine, and cleanse the reins and bladder, being
boiled in white wine, and the wine drank.

_Asphodeli, Hastæ Regiæ fœm._ Of Kings Spear, or Female Asphodel. I
know no physical use of the roots; probably there is, for I do not
believe God created any thing of no use.

_Asphodeli, Albuci, muris._ Of male Asphodel. Hot and dry in the second
degree, inwardly taken, they provoke vomit, urine, and the menses:
outwardly used in ointments, they cause hair to grow, cleanse ulcers,
and take away morphew and freckles from the face.

_Bardanæ, &c._ Of Bur, Clot-bur, or Burdock, temperately hot and dry.
Helps such as spit blood and matter; bruised and mixed with salt and
applied to the place, helps the bitings of mad dogs. It expels wind,
eases pains of the teeth, strengthens the back, helps the running
of the reins, and the whites, being taken inwardly. _Dioscorides_,
_Apuleius_.

_Behen. alb. rub._ Of Valerian, white and red. _Mesue_, _Serapio_, and
other Arabians, say they are hot and moist in the latter end of the
first, or beginning of the second degree, and comfort the heart, stir
up lust. The Grecians held them to be dry in the second degree, that
they stop fluxes, and provoke urine.

_Bellidis._ Of Dasies. See the Leaves.

_Betæ, nigræ, albæ, rubræ._ Of Beets, black, white, and red; as for
black Beets I have nothing to say, I doubt they are as rare as black
swans. The red Beet root boiled and preserved in vinegar, makes a fine,
cool, pleasing, cleansing, digesting sauce. See the leaves.

_Bistortæ, &c._ Of Bistort, or snakeweed, cold and dry in the third
degree, binding: half a dram at a time taken inwardly, resists
pestilence and poison, helps ruptures and bruises, stays fluxes,
vomiting, and immoderate flowing of the menses, helps inflammations
and soreness of the mouth, and fastens loose teeth, being bruised and
boiled in white wine, and the mouth washed with it.

_Borraginis._ Of Borrage, hot and moist in the first degree, cheers
the heart, helps drooping spirits. _Dioscorides._

_Brionæ, &c._ Of Briony both white and black: they are both hot and
dry, some say in the third degree, and some say but in the first; they
purge flegm and watery humours, but they trouble the stomach much,
they are very good for dropsies; the white is most in use, and is good
for the fits of the mother: both of them externally used, take away
freckles, sunburning, and morphew from the face, and cleanse filthy
ulcers: It is but a churlish purge, but being let alone, can do no harm.

_Buglossi._ Of Bugloss: Its virtues are the same with Borrage, and the
roots of either seldom used.

_Bulbus Vomitorius._ A Vomiting Root: I never read of it elswhere by
this general name.

_Calami Aromatici._ Of Aromatical Reed, or sweet garden flag: it
provokes urine, strengthens the lungs, helps bruises, resists poison,
&c. being taken inwardly in powder, the quantity of half a dram at a
time. You may mix it with syrup of violets, if your body be feverish.

_Capparum._ Capper Roots. Are hot and dry in the second degree, cutting
and cleansing: they provoke menses, help malignant ulcers, ease the
toothache, assuage swelling, and help the rickets. _See Oil of Cappers._

_Cariophillatæ, &c._ Of Avens, or Herb Bennet. The roots are dry, and
something hot, of a cleansing quality, they keep garments from being
moth-eaten. See the leaves.

_Caulium._ Of Colewort. I know nothing the roots are good for, but only
to bear the herbs and flowers.

_Centaurii majoris._ Of Centaury the Greater. The roots help such as
are bursten, such as spit blood, shrinking of sinews, shortness of
wind, coughs, convulsions, cramps: half a dram in powder being taken
inwardly, either in muskadel, or in a decoction of the same roots. They
are either not at all, or very scarce in _England_, our centaury is the
small centaury.

_Cepœ._ Of Onions. Are hot and dry (according to _Galen_) in the
fourth degree: they cause dryness, and are extremely hurtful for
choleric people, they breed but little nourishment, and that little is
naught: they are bad meat, yet good physic for phlegmatic people, they
are opening, and provoke urine and the menses, if cold be the cause
obstructing: bruised and outwardly applied, they cure the bitings of
mad dogs, roasted and applied, they help boils, and aposthumes: raw,
they take the fire out of burnings, but ordinarily eaten, they cause
headache, spoil the sight, dull the senses, and fill the body full of
wind.

_Chameleontis albi nigri, &c._ Of Chameleon, white and black. _Tragus_
calls the carline thistle by the name of white chameleon, the root
whereof is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third, it provokes
sweat, kills worms, resists pestilence and poison; it is given with
success in pestilential fevers, helps the toothache by being chewed in
the mouth, opens the stoppings of the liver and spleen, provokes urine,
and the menses: give but little of it at a time, by reason of its heat.
As for the black chameleon, all physicians hold it to have a kind of
venomous quality, and unfit to be used inwardly, _Galen, Clusius,
Nicander, Dioscorides, and Ægineta_. Outwardly in ointments, it is
profitable for scabs, morphew, tetters, &c. and all things that need
cleansing.

_Chelidonij majoris, minoris._ Of celandine, the greater and lesser:
The greater is that which we usually call Celandine: the root is hot
and dry, cleansing and scouring, proper for such as have the yellow
jaundice, it opens obstructions of the liver, being boiled in white
wine, and the decoctions drank; and if chewed in the mouth it helps
the tooth-ache. Celandine the lesser is that which usually we call
Pilewort, which with us is hot in the first degree; the juice of the
root mixed with honey and snuffed up in the nose, purges the head,
helps the hemorrhoids or piles being bathed with it, as also doth the
root only carried about one: being made into an ointment, it helps the
king’s evil or _Scrophula_.

_China_, wonderfully extenuates and dries, provokes sweat, resists
putrefaction; it strengthens the liver, helps the dropsy and malignant
ulcers, leprosy, itch, and venereal, and is profitable in diseases
coming of fasting. It is commonly used in diet drinks for the premises.

_Cichorii._ Of Succory; cool and dry in the second degree, strengthens
the liver and veins, it opens obstructions, stoppings in the liver and
spleen, being boiled in white wine and the decoction drank.

_Colchici._ Of Meadow Saffron. The roots are held to be hurtful to the
stomach, therefore I let them alone.

_Consolidæ, majoris, minoris._ Consolida Major, is that which we
ordinarily call Comfry, it is of a cold quality, yet pretty temperate,
so glutinous, that, according to _Dioscorides_, they will join meat
together that is cut in sunder, if they be boiled with it; it is
excellent for all wounds, both internal and external, for spitting of
blood, ruptures or burstness, pains in the back, it strengthens the
reins, it stops the menses, and helps hemorrhoids. The way to use them
is to boil them in water and drink the decoction. Consolida minor, is
that we call Self-heal, and the latins _Prunella_. See the herb.

_Costi utriusque._ Of Costus both sorts being roots coming from beyond
sea, hot and dry, break wind, being boiled in oil, it is held to help
the gout by anointing the grieved place with it.

_Cucumeris a grestis._ Of wild Cucumber roots; they purge flegm, and
that with such violence, that I would advise the country man that knows
not how to correct them, to let them alone.

_Cinaræ, &c._ Of Artichokes. The roots purge by urine, whereby the rank
savour of the body is much amended.

_Cynoglossæ, &c._ Of Hounds-tongue, Cold and dry: being roasted and
laid to the fundament, helps the hemorrhoids, is also good for burnings
and scaldings.

_Curcumæ._ Of Turmerick, hot in the third degree, opens obstructions,
is profitable against the yellow jaundice, and cold distemper of the
liver and spleen, half a dram being taken at night going to bed in the
pulp of a roasted apple, and if you add a little saffron to it, it will
be the better by far.

_Cyperiutriusque, longi, rotundi._ Of Cyprus Grass, or English Galanga,
both sorts, long and round: is of a warm nature, provokes urine, breaks
the stone, provokes the menses; the ashes of them (being burnt) are
used for ulcers in the mouth, cankers, &c.

_Dauci._ Of Carrots. Are moderately hot and moist, breed but little
nourishment, and are windy.

_Dentaria majoris, &c._ Of Toothwort, toothed violets, or corralwort:
they are drying, binding, and strengthening; are good to ease pains in
the sides and bowels; also being boiled, the decoction is said to be
good to wash green wounds and ulcers with.

_Dictiamni._ Of Dittany: is hot and dry in the third degree, hastens
travail in women, provokes the menses. (See the leaves.)

_Doronici._ Of Doronicum, a supposed kind of Wolf’s bane: It is hot
and dry in the third degree, strengthens the heart, is a sovereign
cordial, and preservative against the pestilence: it helps the vertigo
or swimming of the head, is admirable against the bitings of venomous
beasts, and such as have taken too much opium, as also for lethargies,
the juice helps hot rheums in the eyes; a scruple of the root in powder
is enough to take at one time.

_Dracontii, Dracunculi._ Divers authors attribute divers herbs to this
name. It is most probable that they mean dragons, the roots of which
cleanse mightily, and take away proud, or dead flesh, the very smell of
them is hurtful for pregnant women: outwardly in ointments, they take
away scurf, morphew, and sun-burning; I would not wish any, unless very
well read in physic, to take them inwardly. _Matthiolus_, _Dioscorides_.

_Ebuli._ Of Dwarf Elder, Walwort, or Danewort; hot and dry in the third
degree, the roots are as excellent a purge for the dropsy as any under
the sun. You may take a dram or two drams (if the patient be strong) in
white wine at a time.

_Echij._ Of Viper’s Bugloss, or wild Bugloss. _This root is cold and
dry, good for such as are bitten by venemous beasts, either being
boiled in wine and drank, or bruised and applied to the place: being
boiled in wine and drank, it encreaseth milk in nurses._

Ellebori, Veratri, albi nigri. _Of Hellebore white and black. The root
of white Hellebore, or sneezewort, being grated and snuffed up the
nose, causeth sneezing; kills rats and mice being mixed with their
meat._

_Black Hellebore, Bears-foot or Christmas flower: both this and the
former are hot and dry in the third degree. This is neither so violent
nor dangerous as the former._

Enulæ Campanæ Helenij. _Of Elecampane. It is hot and dry in the
third degree, wholesome for the stomach, resists poison, helps old
coughs, and shortness of breath, helps ruptures, and provokes lust; in
ointments, it is good against scabs and itch._

Endivæ, &c. _Of Endive, Garden Endive, which is the root here
specified, is held to be somewhat colder, though not so dry and
cleansing as that which is wild; it cools hot stomachs, hot livers,
amends the blood corrupted by heat, and therefore is good in fevers,
it cools the reins, and therefore prevents the stone, it opens
obstructions, and provokes urine: you may bruise the root, and boil it
in white wine, ’tis very harmless._

Eringij. _Of Eringo or Sea-holly: the roots are moderately hot,
something drying and cleansing, bruised and applied to the place; they
help the _Scrophula_, or disease in the throat called the King’s
Evil, they break the stone, encrease seed, stir up lust, provoke the
terms, &c._

Esulæ, majoris, minoris. _Of Spurge the greater and lesser, they
are both (taken inwardly) too violent for common use; outwardly in
ointments they cleanse the skin, take away sunburning._

Filicis, &c. _Fearn, of which are two grand distinctions, _viz._
male and female. Both are hot and dry, and good for the rickets in
children, and diseases of the spleen, but dangerous for pregnant women._

Filipendulæ. _Of Dropwort. The roots are hot and dry in the third
degree, opening, cleansing, yet somewhat binding; they provoke urine,
ease pains in the bladder, and are a good preservative against the
falling-sickness._

Fœniculi. _Of Fennel. The root is hot and dry, some say in the third
degree, opening; it provokes urine, and menses, strengthens the liver,
and is good against the dropsy._

Fraxini. _Of Ash-tree. I know no great virtues in physic of the roots._

Galangæ, majoris, minoris. _Galanga, commonly called Galingal, the
greater and lesser: They are hot and dry in the third degree, and
the lesser are accounted the hotter, it strengthens the stomach
exceedingly, and takes away the pains thereof coming of cold or wind;
the smell of it strengthens the brain, it relieves faint hearts, takes
away windiness of the womb, heats the reins, and provokes amorous
diseases. You may take half a dram at a time._ Matthiolus.

Gentiana. _Of Gentian; some call it Felwort, and Baldmoney. It is
hot, cleansing, and scouring, a notable counterpoison, it opens
obstructions, helps the biting of venemous beasts, and mad dogs,
helps digestion, and cleanseth the body of raw humours; the root is
profitable for ruptures, or such as are bursten._

Glycyrrhizæ. _Of Liquorice; the best that is grows in _England_:
it is hot and moist in temperature, helps the roughness of the
windpipe, hoarsness, diseases in the kidneys and bladder, and ulcers in
the bladder, it concocts raw humours in the stomach, helps difficulty
of breathing, is profitable for all salt humours, the root dried and
beaten into powder, and the powder put into the eye, is a special
remedy for a pin and web._

Gramminis. _Of Grass, such as in _London_ they call couch grass,
and Squitch-grass; in _Sussex_ Dog-grass. It gallantly provokes
urine, and easeth the kidneys oppressed with gravel, gripings of the
belly, and difficulty of urine. Let such as are troubled with these
diseases, drink a draught of white wine, wherein these roots (being
bruised) have been boiled, for their morning’s draught, bruised
and applied to the place, they speedily help green wounds._ Galen,
Dioscorides.

Hermodactyli. _Of Hermodactils. They are hot and dry, purge flegm,
especially from the joints, therefore are good for gouts, and other
diseases in the joints. Their vices are corrected with long pepper,
ginger, cinnamon, or mastich. I would not have unskilful people too
busy with purges._

Hyacinthi. _Of Jacinths. The roots are dry in the first degree, and
cold in the second, they stop looseness, bind the belly._

Iridis, vulgaris, and Florentine, &c. Orris, or Flower-de-luce, both
that which grows with us, and that which comes from _Florence_. They
are hot and dry in the third degree, resist poison, help shortness of
the breath, provoke the menses; the Root being green and bruised,
takes away blackness and blueness of a stroke, being applied thereto.

_Imperitoriæ, &c._ Of Master-wort. The root is hot and dry in the third
degree; mitigates the rigour of agues, helps dropsies, provokes sweat,
breaks carbuncles, and plague-sores, being applied to them; it is very
profitable being given inwardly in bruises.

_Isotidis, Glasti._ Of Woad. I know no great physical virtue in the
root. See the Herb.

_Labri Veneris, Dipsaci._ Fullers-Thistle, Teazle. The root being
boiled in wine till it be thick (quoth _Dioscorides_) helps by unction
the clefts of the fundament, as also takes away warts and wens. _Galen_
saith, they are dry in the second degree: and I take it all Authors
hold them to be cold and dry. Unslacked lime beaten into powder, and
mixed with black soap, takes away a wen being anointed with it.

_Lactucæ._ Of Lettice. I know no physical virtue residing in the roots.

_Lauri._ Of the Bay-tree. The Bark of the root drunk with wine,
provokes urine, breaks the stone, opens obstructions of the liver and
spleen. But according to _Dioscorides_ is naught for pregnant women.
_Galen._

_Lapathi acuti, Oxylapathi._ Sorrel, according to _Galen_; but
Sharp-pointed Dock, according to _Dioscorides_. The roots of Sorrel
are held to be profitable against the jaundice. Of Sharp-pointed Dock;
cleanse, and help scabs and itch.

_Levistici._ Of Lovage. They are hot and dry, and good for any diseases
coming of wind.

_Lillij albi._ Of white Lillies. The root is something hot and dry,
helps burnings, softens the womb, provokes the menses, if boiled in
wine, is given with good success in rotten Fevers, Pestilences, and all
diseases that require suppuration: outwardly applied, it helps ulcers
in the head, and amends the ill colour of the face.

_Malvœ._ Of Mallows. They are cool, and digesting, resist poison, and
help corrosions, or gnawing of the bowels, or any other part; as also
ulcers in the bladder. See Marsh-mallows.

_Mandragoræ._ Of Mandrakes. A root dangerous for its coldness, being
cold in the fourth degree: the root is dangerous.

_Mechoachanæ._ Of Mechoacah. It is corrected with Cinnamon, is
temperate yet drying, purges flegm chiefly from the head and joints,
it is good for old diseases in the head, and may safely be given even
to feverish bodies, because of its temperature: it is also profitable
against coughs and pains in the reins; as also against venereal
complaints; the strong may take a dram at a time.

_Mei, &c._ Spignel. The roots are hot and dry in the second or third
degree, and send up unwholesome vapours to the head.

_Mezerei, &c._ Of Spurge, Olive, or Widow-wail. See the Herb, if you
think it worth the seeing.

_Merorum Celci._ Of Mulberry Tree. The bark of the root is bitter, hot
and dry, opens stoppings of the liver and spleen, purges the belly, and
kills worms, boiled in vinegar, helps the tooth-ache.

_Morsus Diaboli, Succisæ, &c._ Devil’s-bit. See the herb.

_Norpi Spicæ, Indicæ, Celticæ, &c._ Of Spikenard, Indian, and Cheltic.
Cheltic Nard wonderfully provokes urine. They are both hot and dry. The
Indian, also provokes urine, and stops fluxes, helps windiness of the
stomach, resists the pestilence, helps gnawing pains of the stomach;
and dries up rheums that molest the head. The Celtic Spikenard performs
the same offices, though in a weaker measure.

_Nenupharis, Nymphæ._ Of Water-lilies. They are cold and dry, and stop
lust: I never dived so deep to find what virtue the roots have.

_Ononidis, Arrestæ Bovis, &c._ Of Cammock, or Rest-harrow, so called
because it makes oxen stand still when they are ploughing. The roots
are hot and dry in the third degree; it breaks the stone (viz.
the bark of it.) The root itself, according to _Pliny_, helps the
falling-sickness; according to _Matthiolus_, helps ruptures: you may
take half a dram at a time.

_Ostrutij._ Masterwort, given once before under the name of
_Imperitoria_. But I have something else to do than to write one thing
twice as they did.

_Pastinatæ, Sativæ, and silvestris._ Garden and Wild Parsnips. They
are of a temperate quality, inclining something to heat: The Garden
Parsnips provoke lust, and nourish as much and more too, than any root
ordinarily eaten: the wild are more physical, being cutting, cleansing,
and opening: they resist the bitings of venomous beasts, ease pains
and stitches in the sides, and are a sovereign remedy against the wind
cholic.

_Pentafylli._ Of Cinqfyl, commonly called Five-leaved, or Five-finger’d
grass: the root is very drying, but moderately hot: It is admirable
against all fluxes, and stops blood flowing from any part of the body:
it helps infirmities of the liver and lungs, helps putrified ulcers of
the mouth, the root boiled in vinegar is good against the shingles, and
appeases the rage of any fretting sores. You may safely take half a
dram at a time in any convenient liquor.

_Petacitæ._ Of Butter-bur. The roots are hot and dry in the second
degree, they are exceeding good in violent and pestilential fevers,
they provoke the menses, expel poison, and kill worms.

_Peucedani, Fœniculi porcini._ Of Sulphur-wort, Hogs-fennel, or
Hore-strange. It is very good applied to the navels of children that
stick out, and ruptures: held in the mouth, it is a present remedy
for the fits of the mother: being taken inwardly, it gives speedy
deliverance to women in travail, and brings away the placenta.

Pœoniœ, maris, fœmellæ. _Of Peony male and female. They are meanly
hot, but more drying. The root helps women not sufficiently purged
after travail, it provokes the menses, and helps pains in the belly,
as also in the reins and bladder, falling sickness, and convulsions in
children, being either taken inwardly, or hung about their necks. You
may take half a dram at a time, and less for children._

Phu, Valerinæ, majoris, minoris. _Valerian, or Setwal, greater and
lesser. They are temperately hot, the greater provokes urine and the
menses, helps the stranguary, stays rheums in the head, and takes away
the pricking pains thereof. The lesser resist poison, assuages the
swelling of the testicles, coming either through wind or cold, helps
cold taken after sweating or labour, wind cholic: outwardly it draws
out thorns, and cures both wounds and ulcers._

Pimpinellæ, &c. _Of Burnet. It doth this good, to bring forth a gallant
physical herb._

Plantaginis. _Of Plantane. The root is something dryer than the leaf,
but not so cold, it opens stoppages of the liver, helps the jaundice,
and ulcers of the reins and bladder. A little bit of the root being
eaten, instantly stays pains in the head, even to admiration._

_Polypodij._ Of Polypodium, or Fern of the Oak. It is a gallant though
gentle purger of melancholy; Also in the opinion of _Mesue_ (as famous
a physician as ever I read for a Galenist,) it dries up superfluous
humours, takes away swellings from the hands, feet, knees, and joints,
stitches and pains in the sides, infirmities of the spleen, rickets;
correct it with a few Annis seeds, or Fennel seeds, or a little ginger,
and then the stomach will not loath it. Your best way of taking it, is
to bruise it well, and boil it in white wine till half be consumed, you
may put in much, or little, according to the strength of the diseased,
it works very safely.

_Poligonati, sigilli Solomonis, &c._ Of Solomon’s Seal. Stamped and
boiled in wine it speedily helps (being drank) all broken bones, and is
of incredible virtue that way; as also being stamped and applied to the
place, it soon heals all wounds, and quickly takes away the black and
blue marks of blows, being bruised and applied to the place, and for
these, I am persuaded there is not a better medicine under the sun.

_Porri._ Of Leeks. They say they are hot and dry in the fourth degree;
they breed ill-favoured nourishment at the best, they spoil the eyes,
heat the body, cause troublesome sleep, and are noisome to the stomach:
yet are they good for something else, for the juice of them dropped
into the ears takes away the noise of them, mixed with a little vinegar
and snuffed up the nose, it stays the bleeding of it, they are better
of the two boiled than raw, but both ways exceedingly hurtful for
ulcers in the bladder: and so are onions and garlic.

_Prunellorum Silvestrium._ Of Sloe-bush, or Sloe-tree. I think the
college set this amongst the roots only for fashion sake, and I did it
because they did.

_Pyrethri Salivaris, &c._ Pelitory of Spain. It is hot and dry in
the fourth degree, chewed in the mouth, it draws away rheum in the
tooth-ache; bruised and boiled in oil, it provokes sweat by unction;
inwardly taken, they say it helps palsies and other cold effects in the
brain and nerves.

_Rhapontici_, Rhupontick, or Rhubarb of Pontus. It takes away windiness
and weakness of the stomach, sighings, sobbings, spittings of blood,
diseases of the liver and spleen, rickets, &c. if you take a dram at a
time it will purge a little, but bind much, and therefore fit for foul
bodies that have fluxes.

_Rhabarbari._ Of Rhubarb. It gently purges choler from the stomach
and liver, opens stoppings, withstands the dropsy, Hypocondriac
Melancholly; a little boiling takes away the virtue of it, and
therefore it is best given by infusion only; If your body be any thing
strong, you may take two drams of it at a time being sliced thin and
steeped all night in white wine, in the morning strain it out and drink
the white wine; it purges but gently, it leaves a binding quality
behind it, therefore dried a little by the fire and beaten into powder,
it is usually given in fluxes.

_Rhaphani, Domesticœ and Sylvestris._ Of Raddishes, garden and wild.
Garden Raddishes provoke urine, break the stone, and purge by urine
exceedingly, yet breed very bad blood, are offensive to the stomach,
and hard of digestion, hot and dry in quality. Wild, or Horse
Raddishes, such as grow in ditches, are hotter and drier than the
former, and more effectual.

_Rhodie Rad._ Rose Root. Stamped and applied to the head it mitigates
the pains thereof, being somewhat cool in quality.

_Rhabarbari Monachorum._ Monks Rhubarb, or Bastard-Rhubarb, it also
purges, and cleanses the blood, and opens obstructions of the liver.

_Rubiæ tinctorum._ Of Madder. It is both drying and binding, yet not
without some opening quality, for it helps the yellow jaundice, and
therefore opens obstructions of the liver and gall; it is given with
good success, to such as have had bruises by falls, stops looseness,
the hemorrhoids, and the menses.

_Rusci._ Of Knee-holly or Butchers-broom, or Bruscus. They are meanly
hot and dry, provoke urine, break the stone, and help such as cannot
evacuate urine freely. Use them like grass roots.

_Sambuci._ Of Elder. I know no wonders the root will do.

_Sarsæ-Parigliæ._ Of Sarsa-Parilla, or Bind-weed; somewhat hot and dry,
helpful against pains in the head, and joints; they provoke sweat, and
are used familiarly in drying diet drinks.

_Satyrij utriusque._ Of Satyrion, each sort. They are hot and moist in
temper, provoke venery, and increase seed; each branch bears two roots,
both spongy, yet the one more solid than the other, which is of most
virtue, and indeed only to be used, for some say the most spongy root
is quite contrary in operation to the other, as the one increaseth, the
other decreaseth.

_Saxifragiæ albæ._ Of white Saxifrage, in _Sussex_ we call them
Lady-smocks. The roots powerfully break the stone, expel wind, provoke
urine, and cleanse the reins.

_Sanguisorbæ._ A kind of Burnet.

_Scabiosa._ Of Scabious. The roots either boiled, or beaten into
powder, and so taken, help such as are extremely troubled with scabs
and itch, are medicinal in the french disease, hard swellings, inward
wounds, being of a drying, cleansing, and healing faculty.

_Scordij._ Of Scordium, or Water-Germander. See the herb.

_Scillæ._ Of Squills. See vinegar, and wine of Squills, in the compound.

_Scropulariæ, &c._ Of Figwort. The roots being of the same virtue with
the herb, I refer you thither.

_Scorzoneræ._ Of Vipers grass. The root cheers the heart, and
strengthens the vital spirits, resists poison, helps passions and
tremblings of the heart, faintness, sadness, and melancholy, opens
stoppings of the liver and spleen, provokes the menses, ease women of
the fits of the mother, and helps swimmings in the head.

_Seseleos._ Of Seseli, or Hartwort. The roots provoke urine, and help
the falling-sickness.

_Sisari, secacul._ Of Scirrets. They are hot and moist, of good
nourishment, something windy, as all roots are; by reason of which,
they provoke venery, they stir up appetite, and provoke urine.

_Sconchi._ Of Sow-thistles. See the herb.

_Spinæ albæ, Bedeguar._ The Arabians called our Ladies-thistles by
that name; the roots of which are drying and binding, stop fluxes,
bleeding, take away cold swellings, and ease the pains of the teeth.

_Spatulæ fœtidæ._ Stinking Gladon, a kind of Flower-de-luce, called
so for its unsavory smell. It is hot and dry in the third degree;
outwardly they help the king’s evil, soften hard swellings, draw out
broken bones: inwardly taken, they help convulsions, ruptures, bruises,
infirmities of the lungs.

_Tamarisci._ Of Tamaris. See the herbs, and barks.

_Tanaceti._ Of Tansie. The root eaten, is a singular remedy for the
gout: the rich may bestow the cost to preserve it.

_Thapsi, &c._ A venomous foreign root: therefore no more of it.

_Tormentillæ._ Of Tormentil. A kind of Sinqfoil; dry in the third
degree, but moderately hot; good in pestilences, provokes sweat, stays
vomiting, cheers the heart, expels poison.

_Trifolij._ Of Trefoil. See the herb.

_Tribuli Aquatici._ Of Water Caltrops. The roots lie too far under
water for me to reach to.

_Trachellij._ Of Throat-wort: by some called Canterbury Bells: by some
Coventry Bells. They help diseases and ulcers in the throat.

_Trinitatis herbæ._ Hearts-ease, or Pansies. I know no great virtue
they have.

_Tunicis._ I shall tell you the virtue when I know what it is.

_Tripolij._ The root purges flegm, expels poison.

_Turbith._ The root purges flegm, (being hot in the third degree)
chiefly from the exterior parts of the body: it is corrected with
ginger, or Mastich. Let not the vulgar be too busy with it.

_Tuburnum._ Or Toad-stools. Whether these be roots or no, it matters
not much: for my part I know but little need of them, either in food
or physic.

_Victorialis._ A foreign kind of Garlick. They say, being hung about
the neck of cattle that are blind suddenly, it helps them; and defends
those that bear it, from evil spirits.

Swallow-wort, and teazles were handled before.

_Ulmariæ, Reginæ, prati, &c._ Mead-sweet. Cold and dry, binding, stops
fluxes, and the immoderate flowing of the menses: you may take a dram
at a time.

_Urticæ._ Of Nettles. See the leaves.

_Zedoariæ._ Of Zedoary, or Setwall. This and _Zurumbet_, according to
_Rhasis_, and _Mesue_, are all one; _Avicenna_ thinks them different:
I hold with _Mesue_; indeed they differ in form, for the one is long,
the other round; they are both hot and dry in the second degree, expel
wind, resist poison, stop fluxes, and the menses, stay vomiting, help
the cholic, and kill worms; you may take half a dram at a time.

_Zingiberis._ Of Ginger. Helps digestion, warms the stomach, clears the
sight, and is profitable for old men: heats the joints, and therefore
is profitable against the gout, expels wind; it is hot and dry in the
second degree.


    BARKS.

_A Pil Rad._ Of the roots of Smallage. Take notice here, that the Barks
both of this root, as also of Parsley, Fennel, &c. is all of the root
which is in use, neither can it properly be called bark, for it is all
the root, the hard pith in the middle excepted, which is always thrown
away, when the roots are used. It is something hotter and drier than
Parsley, and more medicinal; it opens stoppings, provokes urine, helps
digestion, expels wind, and warms a cold stomach: use them like grass
roots.

_Avellanarum._ Of Hazel. The rind of the tree provokes urine, breaks
the stone; the husks and shells of the nuts, dried and given in powder,
stay the immoderate flux of the menses.

_Aurantiorum._ Of Oranges. Both these, and also Lemons and Citrons,
are of different qualities: the outward bark, _viz._ what looks red,
is hot and dry, the white is cold and moist, the juice colder than it,
the seeds hot and dry; the outward bark is that which here I am to
speak to, it is somewhat hotter than either that of Lemons or Citrons,
therefore it warms a cold stomach more, and expels wind better, but
strengthens not the heart so much.

_Berber, &c._ Barberries. The Rind of the tree according to _Clœsius_,
being steeped in wine, and the wine drank, purges choler, and is a
singular remedy for the yellow jaundice. Boil it in white wine and
drink it. See the directions at the beginning.

_Cassia Lignea, &c._ It is something more oily than Cinnamon, yet the
virtues being not much different, I refer you thither.

_Capparis Rad._ Of Caper roots. See the roots.

_Castanearum._ Of Chesnuts. The bark of the Chesnut tree is dry and
binding, and stops fluxes.

_Cinnamonum._ Cinnamon, and Cassia Lignea, are hot and dry in the
second degree, strengthens the stomach, help digestion, cause a sweet
breath, resist poison, provoke urine, and the menses, cause speedy
delivery in women to travail, help coughs and defluxions of humours
upon the lungs, dropsy, and difficulty of urine. In ointments it takes
away red pimples, and the like deformities from the face. There is
scarce a better remedy for women in labour, than a dram of Cinnamon
newly beaten into powder, and taken in white wine.

_Citrij._ Of Pome Citrons. The outward pill, which I suppose is that
which is meant here: It strengthens the heart, resists poison, amends
a stinking breath, helps digestion, comforts a cold stomach.

_Ebuli Rad._ Of the roots of Dwarf-Elder, or Walwort. See the herbs.

_Enulæ._ Of Elecampane. See the roots.

_Esulæ Rad._ See the roots.

_Fabarum._ Of Beans. Bean Cods (or Pods, as we in _Sussex_ call them)
being bruised, the ashes are a sovereign remedy for aches in the
joints, old bruises, gouts, and sciaticas.

_Fœniculi Rad._ Of Fennel roots. See the roots, and remember the
observation given in Smallage at the beginning of the barks.

_Fraxini Rad._ Of the bark of Ash-tree roots. The bark of the tree,
helps the rickets, is moderately hot and dry, stays vomiting; being
burnt, the ashes made into an ointment, helps leprosy and other
deformity of the skin, eases pains of the spleen. You may lay the bark
to steep in white wine for the rickets, and when it hath stood so for
two or three days, let the diseased child drink now and then a spoonful
of it.

_Granatorum._ Of Pomegranates. The rind cools, and forcibly binds,
stays fluxes, and the menses, helps digestion, strengthens weak
stomachs, fastens the teeth, and are good for such whose gums waste.
You may take a dram of it at a time inwardly. Pomegranate flowers are
of the same virtue.

_Gatrujaci._ See the wood.

_Juglandium Virid._ Of green Walnuts. As for the outward green bark of
Walnuts, I suppose the best time to take them is before the Walnuts
be shelled at all, and then you may take nuts and all (if they may
properly be called nuts at such a time) you shall find them exceeding
comfortable to the stomach, they resist poison, and are a most
excellent preservative against the plague, inferior to none: they are
admirable for such as are troubled with consumptions of the lungs.

_Lauri._ Of the Bay-tree. See the root.

_Limonum._ Of Lemons. The outward peel is of the nature of Citron, but
helps not so effectually; however, let the poor country man that cannot
get the other, use this.

_Mandragora Rad._ Be pleased to look back to the root.

_Myrobalanorum._ Of Myrobalans. See the fruits.

_Macis._ Of Mace. It is hot in the third degree, strengthens the
stomach and heart exceedingly, and helps concoction.

_Maceris, &c._ It is held to be the inner bark of Nutmeg-tree, helps
fluxes and spitting of blood.

_Petroselini Rad._ Of Parsley root: opens obstructions, provokes urine
and the menses, warms a cold stomach, expels wind, and breaks the
stone. Use them as grass roots, and take out the inner pith as you were
taught in smallage roots.

_Prunelli Silvestris._ Of Sloe-tree. I know no use of it.

_Pinearum putaminae._ Pine shucks, or husks. I suppose they mean of the
cones that hold the seeds; both those and also the bark of the tree,
stop fluxes, and help the lungs.

_Querci._ Of Oak-tree. Both the bark of the oak, and Acorn Cups are
drying and cold, binding, stop fluxes and the menses, as also the
running of the reins; have a care how you use them before due purging.

_Rhaphani._ Of Radishes. I could never see any bark they had.

_Suberis._ Of Cork. It is good for something else besides to stop
bottles: being dry and binding, stanches blood, helps fluxes,
especially the ashes of it being burnt. _Paulus._

_Sambuci, &c._ Of Elder roots and branches; purges water, helps the
dropsy.

_Cort. Medius Tamaricis._ The middle Bark of Tameris, eases the spleen,
helps the rickets. Use them as Ash-tree bark.

_Tillim._ Of Line-tree. Boiled, the water helps burnings.

_Thuris._ Of Frankinsenses. I must plead _Ignoramus_.

_Ulmi._ Of Elm. Moderately hot and cleansing, good for wounds, burns,
and broken bones, _viz._ boiled in water and the grieved place bathed
with it.


    WOODS AND THEIR CHIPS, OR
    RASPINGS.

_A Gallochus, Lignum Aloes._ Wood of Aloes; is moderately hot and dry:
a good cordial: a rich perfume, a great strengthener to the stomach.

_Aspalathus._ Rose-wood. It is moderately hot and dry, stops looseness,
provokes urine, and is excellent to cleanse filthy ulcers.

_Bresilium._ Brasil. All the use I know of it is, to die cloth, and
leather, and make red ink.

_Buxus._ Box. Many Physicians have written of it, but no physical
virtue of it.

_Cypressus._ Cypress. The Wood laid amongst cloaths, secures them from
moths. See the leaves.

_Ebenum._ Ebony. It is held to clear the sight, being either boiled in
wine, or burnt to ashes.

_Guajacum, Lignum vitm._ Dries, attenuates, causes sweat, resists
putrefaction, is good for the French disease, as also for ulcers,
scabs, and leprosy: it is used in diet drinks.

_Juniperus._ Juniper. The smoak of the wood, drives away serpents; the
ashes of it made into lie, cures itch, and scabs.

_Nephriticum._ It is a light wood and comes from _Hispaniola_; being
steeped in water, will soon turn it blue, it is hot and dry in the
first degree, and so used as before, is an admirable remedy for the
stone, and for obstructions of the liver and spleen.

_Rhodium._ Encreases milk in nurses.

_Santalum, album, Rubrum, citrinum._ White, red, and yellow Sanders:
They are all cold and dry in the second or third degree: the red stops
defluxions from any part, and helps inflammations: the white and yellow
(of which the yellow is best) cool the heat of fevers, strengthen the
heart, and cause cheerfulness.

_Sassafras._ Is hot and dry in the second degree, it opens obstructions
or stoppings, it strengthens the breast exceedingly; if it be weakened
through cold, it breaks the stone, stays vomiting, provokes urine, and
is very profitable in the venereal, used in diet drinks.

_Tamaris._ Is profitable for the rickets, and burnings.

_Xylobalsamum._ Wood of the Balsam tree, it is hot and dry in the
second degree, according to Galen. I never read any great virtues of it.


    HERBS AND THEIR LEAVES.

_A Brotanum, mas, fœmina._ Southernwood, male and female. It is hot
and dry in the third degree, resists poison, kills worms; outwardly
in plaisters, it dissolves cold swellings, and helps the bitings of
venomous beasts, makes hair grow: take not above half a dram at a time
in powder.

_Absinthium, &c._ Wormwood. Its several sorts, are all hot and dry
in the second or third degrees, the common Wormwood is thought to be
hottest, they all help weakness of the stomach, cleanse choler, kill
worms, open stoppings, help surfeits, clear the sight, resist poison,
cleanse the blood, and secure cloaths from moths.

_Abugilissa, &c._ Alkanet. The leaves are something drying and binding,
but inferior in virtue to the roots, to which I refer you.

_Acetosa._ Sorrel. Is moderately cold dry and binding, cuts tough
humours, cools the brain, liver and stomach, cools the blood in fevers,
and provokes appetite.

_Acanthus._ Bears-breech, or Branks ursine, is temperate, something
moist. See the root.

_Adiantum, Album, nigrum._ Maiden hair, white and black. They are
temperate, yet drying. White Maiden hair is that we usually call
Wall-rue; they both open obstructions, cleanse the breast and lungs of
gross slimy humours, provoke urine, help ruptures and shortness of wind.

_Adiantum Aurcum Politrycum._ Golden Maiden-hair. Its temperature and
virtues are the same with the former; helps the spleen; burned, and lye
made with the ashes, keeps the hair from falling off the head.

_Agrimonia._ Agrimony. _Galen’s Eupatorium._ It is hot and dry in
the first degree, binding, it amends the infirmities of the liver,
helps such as evacuate blood instead of water, helps inward wounds,
opens obstructions. Outwardly applied it helps old sores, ulcers, &c.
Inwardly, it helps the jaundice and the spleen. Take a dram of this or
that following, inwardly in white wine, or boil the herb in white wine,
and drink the decoction. _Galen, Pliny, Dioscorides, Serapio._

_Ageretum._ Hot and dry in the second degree, provokes urine and the
menses, dries the brain, opens stoppings, helps the green sickness, and
profits such as have a cold, weak liver; outwardly applied, it takes
away the hardness of the matrix, and fills hollow ulcers with flesh.

_Agnus Castus, &c._ Chast-tree. The leaves are hot and dry in the third
degree; expel wind, consume the seed, cause chastity being only borne
about one; it dissolves swellings of the testicles, being applied to
them, head-ache, and lethargy.

_Allajula, Lujula, &c._ Wood Sorrel. It is of the temperature of other
Sorrel, and held to be more cordial; cools the blood, helps ulcers in
the mouth; hot defluxions upon the lungs, wounds, ulcers, &c.

_Alcea._ Vervain Mallow. The root helps fluxes and burstness. _Ætius,
Dioscorides._

_Allium._ Garlick. Hot and dry in the fourth degree, troublesome to the
stomach; it dulls the sight, spoils a clear skin, resists poison, eases
the pains of the teeth, helps the bitings of mad dogs, and venomous
beasts, helps ulcers, leprosies, provokes urine, is exceedingly
opening, and profitable for dropsies.

_Althæa, &c._ Marsh-Mallows. Are moderately hot and drier than other
Mallows; they help digestion, and mitigate pain, ease the pains of the
stone, and in the sides. Use them as you were taught in the roots,
whose virtues they have, and both together will do better.

_Alsine._ Chickweed. Is cold and moist without any binding, assuages
swelling, and comforts the sinews much; therefore it is good for such
as are shrunk up; it dissolves aposthumes, hard swellings, and helps
mange in the hands and legs, outwardly applied in a pultis. _Galen._

_Alchymilla._ Ladies-Mantle. Is hot and dry, some say in the second
degree, some say in the third: outwardly it helps wounds, reduces
women’s breasts that hang down: inwardly, helps bruises, and ruptures,
stays vomiting, and the Fluor Albus, and is very profitable for such
women as are subject to miscarry through cold and moisture.

_Alkanna._ Privet hath a binding quality, helps ulcers in the mouth, is
good against burnings and scaldings, cherishes the nerves and sinews;
boil it in white wine to wash the mouth, and in hog’s grease for
burnings and scaldings.

_Amaracus, Majorana._ Marjoram. Some say ’tis hot and dry in the second
degree, some advance it to the third. Sweet Marjoram, is an excellent
remedy for cold diseases in the brain, being only smelled to helps
such as are given to much sighing, easeth pains in the belly, provokes
urine, being taken inwardly: you may take a dram of it at a time in
powder. Outwardly in oils or salves, it helps sinews that are shrunk;
limbs out of joint, all aches and swellings coming of a cold cause.

_Angelica._ Is hot and dry in the third degree; opens, digests, makes
thin, strengthens the heart, helps fluxes, and loathsomeness of meat.
It is an enemy to poison and pestilence, provokes menses, and brings
away the placanta. You may take a dram of it at a time in powder.

_Anagallis, mas, femina._ Pimpernel, male and female. They are
something hot and dry, and of such a drying quality that they draw
thorns and splinters out of the flesh, amend the sight, cleanse ulcers,
help infirmities of the liver and reins. _Galen._

_Anethum._ Dill. Is hot and dry in the second degree. It stays
vomiting, eases hiccoughs, assuages swellings, provokes urine, helps
such as are troubled with fits of the mother, and digests raw humours.

_Apium._ Smallage; So it is commonly used; but indeed all Parsley is
called by the name of Apium, of which this is one kind. It is something
hotter and dryer than Parsley, and more efficacious; it opens stoppings
of the liver, and spleen, cleanses the blood, provokes the menses,
helps a cold stomach to digest its meat, and is good against the yellow
jaundice. Both Smallage and Clevers, may be well used in pottage in the
morning instead of herbs.

_Aparine._ Goose-grass, or Clevers: They are meanly hot and dry,
cleansing, help the bitings of venomous beasts, keep men’s bodies from
growing too fat, help the yellow jaundice, stay bleeding, fluxes, and
help green wounds. _Dioscorides, Pliny, Galen, Tragus._

_Aspergula odorata._ Wood-roof: Cheers the heart, makes men merry,
helps melancholy, and opens the stoppings of the liver.

_Aquilegia._ Columbines: help sore throats, are of a drying, binding
quality.

_Argentina._ Silver-weed, or Wild Tansy; cold and dry almost in the
third degree; stops lasks, fluxes, and the menses, good against ulcers,
the stone, and inward wounds: easeth gripings in the belly, fastens
loose teeth: outwardly it takes away freckles, morphew, and sunburning,
it takes away inflammations, and bound to the wrists stops the violence
of the fits of the ague.

_Artanita._ Sow-bread: hot and dry in the third degree, it is a
dangerous purge: outwardly in ointments it takes away freckles,
sunburning, and the marks which the small pox leaves behind them:
dangerous for pregnant women.

_Aristolochia, longa, rotunda._ Birth-wort long and round. See the
roots.

_Artemisia._ Mugwort: is hot and dry in the second degree: binding: an
herb appropriated to the female sex; it brings down the menses, brings
away both birth and placenta, eases pains in the matrix. You may take a
dram at a time.

_Asparagus._ See the roots.

_Asarum, &c._ Asarabacca: hot and dry; provokes vomiting and urine, and
are good for dropsies. They are corrected with mace or cinnamon.

_Atriplex, &c._ Orach, or Arrach. It is cold in the first degree, and
moist in the second, saith _Galen_, and makes the belly soluble. It is
an admirable remedy for the fits of the mother, and other infirmities
of the matrix, and therefore the Latins called it _Vulvaria_.

_Aricula muris, major._ Mouse-ear: hot and dry, of a binding quality,
it is admirable to heal wounds, inward or outward, as also ruptures
or burstness: Edge-tools quenched in the juice of it, will cut iron
without turning the edge, as easy as they will lead: And, lastly, it
helps the swelling of the spleen, coughs and consumptions, of the
lungs.

_Attractivis hirsuta._ Wild Bastard-saffron, Distaff-thistle, or
Spindle-thistle. Is dry and moderately digesting, helps the biting of
venomous beasts: _Mesue_ saith, it is hot in the first degree, and dry
in the second, and cleanseth the breast and lungs of tough flegm.

_Balsamita, &c._ Costmary, Alecost: See Maudlin.

_Barbajovis, sedum majus._ Houseleek or Sengreen: cold in the third
degree, profitable against the Shingles, and other hot creeping ulcers,
inflammations, _St. Anthony’s_ fire, frenzies; it cools and takes away
corns from the toes, being bathed with the juice of it, and a skin of
the leaf laid over the place; stops fluxes, helps scalding and burning.

_Bardana._ Clot-bur, or Bur-dock: temperately dry and wasting,
something cooling; it is held to be good against the shrinking of the
sinews; eases pains in the bladder, and provokes urine. Also _Mizaldus_
saith, that a leaf applied to the top of the head of a woman draws
the matrix upwards, but applied to the soles of the feet draws it
downwards, and is therefore an admirable remedy for suffocations,
precipitations, and dislocations of the matrix, if a wise man have but
the using of it.

_Beta, alba, nigra, rubra._ Beets, white, black, and red; black Beets
I have no knowledge of. The white are something colder and moister
than the red, both of them loosen the belly, but have little or no
nourishment. The white provoke to stool, and are more cleansing, open
stoppings of the liver and spleen, help the vertigo or swimming in the
head: The red stay fluxes, help the immoderate flowing of the menses,
and are good in the yellow jaundice.

_Benedicta Cariphyllara._ Avens: hot and dry, help the cholic and
rawness of the stomach, stitches in the sides, and take away clotted
blood in any part of the body.

_Betonica vulgaris._ Common or Wood Betony: hot and dry in the second
degree, helps the falling sickness and all head-aches coming of cold,
cleanses the breast and lungs, opens stoppings of the liver and spleen,
as the rickets, &c. procures appetite, helps sour belchings, provokes
urine, breaks the stone, mitigates the pains of the reins and bladder,
helps cramps, and convulsions, resists poison, helps the gout, such as
evacuate blood, madness and head-ache, kills worms, helps bruises, and
cleanseth women after labour: You may take a dram of it at a time in
white wine, or any other convenient liquor proper against the disease
you are afflicted with.

_Betonica Pauli, &c._ Paul’s Betony, or Male Lluellin, to which add
_Elative_, or Female Lluellin, which comes afterwards; they are pretty
temperate, stop defluxions of humours that fall from the head into the
eyes, are profitable in wounds, help filthy foul eating cankers.

_Betonica Coronaria, &c._ Is Clove Gilli-flowers. See the flowers.

_Bellis._ Dasies: are cold and moist in the second degree, they ease
all pains and swellings coming of heat, in clysters they loose the
belly, are profitable in fevers and inflammations of the testicles,
they take away bruises, and blackness and blueness; they are admirable
in wounds and inflammations of the lungs or blood.

_Blitum._ Blites. Some say they are cold and moist, others cold and
dry: none mention any great virtues of them.

_Borrago._ Borrage: hot and moist, comforts the heart, cheers the
spirits, drives away sadness and melancholy, they are rather laxative
than binding; help swooning and heart-qualms, breed good blood, help
consumptions, madness, and such as are much weakened by sickness.

_Bonus Henricus._ Good Henry, or all good; hot and dry, cleansing and
scouring, inwardly taken it loosens the belly; outwardly it cleanseth
old sores and ulcers.

_Botrys._ Oak of Jerusalem: hot and dry in the second degree, helps
such as are short-winded, cuts and wastes gross and tough flegm, laid
among cloaths they preserve them from moths, and give them a sweet
smell.

_Branca ursina._ Bears-breech.

_Brionia, &c._ Briony, white and black; both are hot and dry in
the third degree, purge violently, yet are held to be wholesome
physic for such as have dropsies, vertigo, or swimming in the head,
falling-sickness, &c. Certainly it is a strong, troublesome purge,
therefore not to be tampered with by the unskilful, outwardly in
ointments it takes away freckles, wrinkles, morphew, scars, spots, &c.
from the face.

_Bursa pastoris._ Shepherd’s Purse, is manifestly cold and dry, though
_Lobel_ and _Pena_ thought the contrary; it is binding and stops blood,
the menses; and cools inflammations.

_Buglossom._ Buglosse. Its virtues are the same with Borrage.

_Bugula._ Bugle, or Middle Comfrey; is temperate for heat, but very
drying, excellent for falls or inward bruises, for it dissolves
congealed blood, profitable for inward wounds, helps the rickets and
other stoppings of the liver; outwardly it is of wonderful force in
curing wounds and ulcers, though festered, as also gangreens and
fistulas, it helps broken bones, and dislocations. Inwardly you may
take it in powder a dram at a time, or drink the decoction of it in
white-wine: being made into an ointment with hog’s grease, you shall
find it admirable in green wounds.

_Buphthalmum, &c._ Ox eye. _Matthiolus_ saith they are commonly used
for black Hellebore, to the virtues of which I refer.

_Buxus._ Boxtree: the leaves are hot, dry, and binding, they are
profitable against the biting of mad dogs; both taken inwardly boiled
and applied to the place: besides they are good to cure horses of the
bots.

_Calamintha, Montana, Palustris._ Mountain and Water Calamint: For
the Water Calamint: see mints, than which it is accounted stronger.
Mountain Calamint, is hot and dry in the third degree, provokes urine
and the menses, hastens the birth in women, brings away the placenta,
helps cramps, convulsions, difficulty of breathing, kills worms, helps
the dropsy: outwardly used, it helps such as hold their necks on one
side: half a dram is enough at one time. _Galen, Dioscorides, Apuleius._

_Calendula, &c._ Marigolds. The leaves are hot in the second degree,
and something moist, loosen the belly: the juice held in the mouth,
helps the toothache, and takes away any inflammation or hot swelling
being bathed with it, mixed with a little vinegar.

_Callitricum._ Maiden-hair. See _Adianthum_.

_Caprisolium._ Honey-suckles: The leaves are hot, and therefore naught
for inflammations of the mouth and throat, for which the ignorant
people oftentime give them: and _Galen_ was true in this, let modern
writers write their pleasure. If you chew but a leaf of it in your
mouth, experience will tell you that it is likelier to cause, than
to cure a sore throat, they provoke urine, and purge by urine, bring
speedy delivery to women in travail, yet procure barrenness and hinder
conception, outwardly they dry up foul ulcers, and cleanse the face
from morphew, sun-burning and freckles.

_Carduncellus, &c._ Groundsell. Cold and moist according to _Tragus_,
helps the cholic, and gripings in the belly, helps such as cannot make
water, cleanses the reins, purges choler and sharp humours: the usual
way of taking it is to boil it in water with currants, and so eat it.
I hold it to be a wholesome and harmless purge. Outwardly it easeth
women’s breasts that are swollen and inflamed; as also inflammations of
the joints, nerves, or sinews. _Ægineta._

_Carduus B. Mariæ._ Our Ladies Thistles. They are far more temperate
than _Carduus Benedictus_, open obstructions of the liver, help the
jaundice and dropsy, provoke urine, break the stone.

_Carduus Benedictus._ _Blessed Thistle_, but better known by the Latin
name: it is hot and dry in the second degree, cleansing and opening,
helps swimming and giddiness in the head, deafness, strengthens the
memory, helps griping pains in the belly, kills worms, provokes sweat,
expels poison, helps inflammation of the liver, is very good in
pestilence and venereal: outwardly applied, it ripens plague-sores, and
helps hot swellings, the bitings of mad dogs and venomous beasts, and
foul filthy ulcers. Every one that can but make a Carduus posset, knows
how to use it. _Camerarius, Arnuldus velanovanus._

_Chalina._ See the roots, under the name of white Chameleon.

_Corallina._ A kind of Sea Moss: cold, binding, drying, good for hot
gouts, inflammations: also they say it kills worms, and therefore by
some is called Maw-wormseed.

_Cussutha, cascuta, potagralini._ Dodder. See _Epithimum_.

_Caryophyllata._ Avens, or Herb Bennet, hot and dry: they help the
cholic, rawness of the stomach, stitches in the sides, stoppings of the
liver, and bruises.

_Cataputia minor._ A kind of Spurge. See _Tythymalus_.

_Cattaria, Nepeta._ Nep, or Catmints. The virtues are the same with
Calaminth.

_Cauda Equina._ Horse-tail; is of a binding drying quality, cures
wounds, and is an admirable remedy for sinews that are shrunk: it is a
sure remedy for bleeding at the nose, or by wound, stops the menses,
fluxes, ulcers in the reins and bladder, coughs, ulcers in the lungs,
difficulty of breathing.

_Caulis, Brassica hortensis, silvestris._ Colewort, or Cabbages, garden
and wild. They are drying and binding, help dimness of the sight: help
the spleen, preserve from drunkenness, and help the evil effects of it:
provoke the menses.

_Centaurium, majus, minus._ Centaury the greater and less. They say the
greater will do wonders in curing wounds: see the root. The less is a
present remedy for the yellow jaundice, opens stoppings of the liver,
gall, and spleen: purges choler, helps gout, clears the sight, purgeth
the stomach, helps the dropsy and green sickness. It is only the tops
and flowers which are useful, of which you may take a dram inwardly in
powder, or half a handful boiled in posset-drink at a time.

_Centinodium, &c._ Knotgrass: cold in the second degree, helps spitting
and other evacuations of blood, stops the menses and all other fluxes
of blood, vomiting of blood, gonorrhæa, or running of the reins,
weakness of the back and joints, inflammations of the privities, and
such as make water by drops, and it is an excellent remedy for hogs
that will not eat their meat. Your only way is to boil it, it is in
its prime about the latter end of _July_, or beginning of _August_:
at which time being gathered it may be kept dry all the year.
_Brassavolus, Camerarius._

_Caryfolium vulgare et Myrrhis._ Common and great chervil: Take them
both together, and they are temperately hot and dry, provoke urine,
stir up venery, comfort the heart, and are good for old people; help
pleurises and pricking in the sides.

_Cæpea, Anagallis aquatica._ Brooklime, hot and dry, but not so hot and
dry as Water cresses; they help mangy horses; see Water cresses.

_Ceterach, &c._ Spleenwort: moderately hot, waste and consumes the
spleen, insomuch that _Vitruvius_ affirms he hath known hogs that have
fed upon it, that have had (when they were killed) no spleens at all.
It is excellently good for melancholy people, helps the stranguary,
provokes urine, and breaks the stone in the bladder, boil it and
drink the decoction; but because a little boiling will carry away the
strength of it in vapours, let it boil but very little, and let it
stand close stopped till it be cold before you strain it out; this is
the general rule for all simples of this nature.

_Chamapitys._ Ground-pine; hot in the second degree, and dry in the
third, helps the jaundice, sciatica, stopping of the liver, and spleen,
provokes the menses, cleanses the entrails, dissolves congealed blood,
resists poison, cures wounds and ulcers. Strong bodies may take a dram,
and weak bodies half a dram of it in powder at a time.

_Chamæmelum, sativum, sylvestre._ Garden and Wild Chamomel. Garden
Chamomel, is hot and dry in the first degree, and as gallant a medicine
against the stone in the bladder as grows upon the earth, you may take
it inwardly, I mean the decoction of it, being boiled in white wine, or
inject the juice of it into the bladder with a syringe. It expels wind,
helps belchings, and potently provokes the menses: used in baths, it
helps pains in the sides, gripings and gnawings in the belly.

_Chamædris, &c._ Germander: hot and dry in the third degree; cuts and
brings away tough humours, opens stoppings of the liver and spleen,
helps coughs and shortness of breath, stranguary and stopping of urine,
and provokes the menses; half a dram is enough to take at a time.

_Chelidonium utrumque._ Celandine both sorts. Small Celandine is
usually called Pilewort; it is something hotter and dryer than the
former, it helps the hemorrhoids or piles, bruised and applied to the
grief. Celandine the greater is hot and dry (they say in the third
degree) any way used; either the juice or made into an oil or ointment,
it is a great preserver of the sight, and an excellent help for the
eyes.

_Cinara, &c._ Artichokes. They provoke venery, and purge by urine.

_Cichorium._ Succory, to which add Endive which comes after. They are
cold and dry in the second degree, cleansing and opening; they cool
the heats of the liver, and are profitable in the yellow jaundice, and
burning fevers; help excoriations in the privities, hot stomachs; and
outwardly applied, help hot rheums in the eyes.

_Cicuta._ Hemlock: cold in the fourth degree, poisonous: outwardly
applied, it helps _Priapismus_, the shingles, _St. Anthony’s fire_, or
any eating ulcers.

_Clematis Daphnoides, Vinca provinca._ Periwinkle. Hot in the second
degree, something dry and binding; stops lasks, spitting of blood, and
the menses.

_Consolida major._ Comfrey, I do not conceive the leaves to be so
virtuous as the roots.

_Consolida media._ Bugles, of which before.

_Consolida minima._ Daises.

_Consolida rubra._ Golden Rod: hot and dry in the second degree,
cleanses the reins, provokes urine, brings away the gravel: an
admirable herb for wounded people to take inwardly, stops blood, &c.

_Consolida Regalis, Delphinium._ Lark heels: resist poison, help the
bitings of venomous beasts.

_Saracenica Solidago._ Saracens Confound. Helps inward wounds, sore
mouths, sore throats, wasting of the lungs, and liver.

_Coronepus._ Buchorn Plantane, or Sea-plantain: cold and dry, helps the
bitings of venomous beasts, either taken inwardly, or applied to the
wound: helps the cholic, breaks the stone. _Ægineta._

_Coronaria._ Hath got many English names. Cottonweed, Cudweed,
Chaffweed, and Petty Cotton. Of a drying and binding nature; boiled in
lye, it keeps the head from nits and lice; being laid among clothes, it
keeps them safe from moths, kills worms, helps the bitings of venomous
beasts; taken in a tobacco-pipe, it helps coughs of the lungs, and
vehement headaches.

_Cruciata._ Crosswort: (there is a kind of Gentian called also by this
name, which I pass by) is drying and binding, exceeding good for inward
or outward wounds, either inwardly taken, or outwardly applied: and an
excellent remedy for such as are bursten.

_Crassula._ Orpine. Very good: outwardly used with vinegar, it clears
the skin; inwardly taken, it helps gnawings of the stomach and bowels,
ulcers in the lungs, bloody-flux, and quinsy in the throat, for which
last disease it is inferior to none, take not too much of it at a time,
because of its coolness.

_Crithamus, &c._ Sampire. Hot and dry, helps difficulty of urine, the
yellow jaundice, provokes the menses, helps digestion, opens stoppings
of the liver and spleen. _Galen._

_Cucumis Asininus._ Wild Cucumbers. See _Elaterium_.

_Cyanus major, minor._ Blue bottle, great and small, a fine cooling
herb, helps bruises, wounds, broken veins; the juice dropped into the
eye, helps the inflammations thereof.

_Cygnoglossam._ Hound’s-Tongue, cold and dry: applied to the fundament
helps the hemorrhoids, heals wounds and ulcers, and is a present remedy
against the bitings of dogs, burnings and scaldings.

_Cypressus, Chamœ Cyparissus._ Cypress-tree. The leaves are hot and
binding, help ruptures, and _Polypus_ or flesh growing on the nose.

_Chamæ cyparissus._ Is Lavender Cotton. Resists poison, and kills worms.

_Disetamnus Cretensis._ Dictamny, or Dittany of _Creet_, hot and dry,
brings away dead children, hastens delivery, brings away the placenta,
the very smell of it drives away venomous beasts, so deadly an enemy
it is to poison; it is an admirable remedy against wounds and gunshot,
wounds made with poisoned weapons, it draws out splinters, broken
bones, &c. The dose from half a dram to a dram.

_Dipsacus, sativ. sylv._ Teazles, garden and wild, the leaves bruised
and applied to the temples, allay the heat in fevers, qualify the rage
in frenzies; the juice dropped into the ears, kills worms in them,
dropped into the eyes, clears the sight, helps redness and pimples in
the face, being anointed with it.

_Ebulus._ Dwarf Elder, or Walwort. Hot and dry in the third degree;
waste hard swellings, being applied in form of a poultice; the hair of
the head anointed with the juice of it turns it black; the leaves being
applied to the place, help inflammations, burnings, scaldings, the
bitings of mad dogs; mingled with bulls suet is a present remedy for
the gout; inwardly taken, is a singular purge for the dropsy and gout.

_Echium._ Viper’s-bugloss, Viper’s-herb, Snake bugloss, Wal-bugloss,
Wild-bugloss, several counties give it these several names: It is
a singular remedy being eaten, for the biting of venomous beasts:
continually eating of it makes the body invincible against the poison
of serpents, toads, spiders, &c. however it be administered; it
comforts the heart, expels sadness and melancholy. The rich may make
the flowers into a conserve, and the herb into a syrup, the poor may
keep it dry, both may keep it as a jewel.

_Empetron, Calcifragra, Herniaria, &c._ Rupture-wort, or Burst-wort.
The English name tells you it is good against ruptures, and so such as
are bursten shall find it, if they please to make trial of it, either
inwardly taken, or outwardly applied to the place, or both. Also the
Latin names hold it forth to be good against the stone, which whoso
tries shall find true.

_Enula Campana._ Elicampane. Provokes urine. See the root.

_Epithimum._ Dodder of Time, to which add common Dodder, which is
usually that which grows upon flax: indeed every Dodder retains a
virtue of that herb or plant it grows upon, as Dodder that grows
upon Broom, provokes urine forcibly, and loosens the belly, and is
moister than that which grows upon flax: that which grows upon time,
is hotter and dryer than that which grows upon flax, even in the third
degree, opens obstructions, helps infirmities of the spleen, purgeth
melancholy, relieves drooping spirits, helps the rickets: That which
grows on flax, is excellent for agues in young children, strengthens
weak stomachs, purgeth choler, provokes urine, opens stoppings in
the reins and bladder. That which grows upon nettles, provokes urine
exceedingly. The way of using it is to boil it in white wine, or
other convenient decoction, and boil it very little. _Ætias, Mesue,
Actuarius, Serapio, Avincena._

_Eruch._ Rocket, hot and dry in the third degree, being eaten alone,
causeth head-ache, by its heat procures urine. _Galen._

_Eupatorium._ See _Ageratum_.

_Euphragia._ Eyebright is something hot and dry, the very sight of it
refresheth the eyes; inwardly taken, it restores the sight, and makes
old men’s eyes young, a dram of it taken in the morning is worth a
pair of spectacles, it comforts and strengthens the memory, outwardly
applied to the place, it helps the eyes.

    _Filix fœmina._         }
    _Filicula, polypidium._ } See the roots.
    _Filipendula._          }

_Malahathram._ Indian-leaf, hot and dry in the second degree, comforts
the stomach exceedingly, helps digestion, provokes urine, helps
inflammations of the eyes, secures cloaths from moths.

_Fæniculum._ Fennel, encreaseth milk in nurses, provokes urine, breaks
the stone, easeth pains in the reins, opens stoppings, breaks wind,
provokes the menses; you may boil it in white wine.

_Fragaria._ Strawberry leaves, are cold, dry, and binding, a singular
remedy for inflammations and wounds, hot diseases in the throat; they
stop fluxes and the terms, cool the heat of the stomach, and the
inflammations of the liver. The best way is to boil them in barley
water.

_Fraxinus, &c._ Ash-trees, the leaves are moderately hot and dry, cure
the bitings of Adders, and Serpents; they stop looseness, and stay
vomiting, help the rickets, open stoppages of the liver and spleen.

_Fumaria._ Fumitory: cold and dry, it opens and cleanses by urine,
helps such as are itchy, and scabbed, clears the skin, opens stoppings
of the liver and spleen, helps rickets, hypochondriac melancholy,
madness, frenzies, quartan agues, loosens the belly, gently purgeth
melancholy, and addust choler: boil it in white wine, and take this one
general rule. _All things of a cleansing or opening nature may be most
commodiously boiled in white wine._ Remember but this, and then I need
not repeat it.

_Galega._ Goat’s-rue: Temperate in quality, resists poison, kills
worms, helps the falling-sickness, resists the pestilence. You may take
a dram of it at a time in powder.

_Galion._ Ladies-bed straw: dry and binding, stanches blood, boiled in
oil, the oil is good to anoint a weary traveller; inwardly it provokes
venery.

_Gentiana._ See the root.

_Genista._ Brooms: hot and dry in the second degree, cleanse and open
the stomach, break the stone in the reins and bladder, help the green
sickness. Let such as are troubled with heart-qualms or faintings,
forbear it, for it weakens the heart and spirit vital. See the flowers.

_Geranium._ Cranebill, the divers sorts of it, one of which is that
which is called Muscata; it is thought to be cool and dry, helps hot
swellings, and by its smell amends a hot brain.

_Geranium Columbinum._ Doves-foot; helps the wind cholic, pains in the
belly, stone in the reins and bladder, and is good in ruptures, and
inward wounds. I suppose these are the general virtues of them all.

_Gramen._ Grass: See the root.

_Gratiola._ Hedge-Hyssop, purges water and flegm, but works very
churlishly. _Gesner_ commends it in dropsies.

_Asphodelus fœm._ See the root.

_Hepatica, Lichen._ Liverwort, cold and dry, good for inflammations of
the liver, or any other inflammations, yellow jaundice.

_Hedera Arborea, Terrostris._ Tree and Ground-Ivy. Tree-Ivy helps
ulcers, burnings, scaldings, the bad effects of the spleen; the juice
snuffed up the nose, purges the head, it is admirable for surfeits or
headache, or any other ill effects coming of drunkenness. Ground-Ivy
is that which usually is called Alehoof, hot and dry, the juice helps
noise in the ears, fistulas, gouts, stoppings of the liver, it
strengthens the reins and stops the menses, helps the yellow jaundice,
and other diseases coming of stoppings of the liver, and is excellent
for wounded people.

_Herba Camphorata._ Stinking Ground-pine, is of a drying quality, and
therefore stops defluxions either in the eyes or upon the lungs, the
gout, cramps, palsies, aches: strengthens the nerves.

_Herbu Paralysis, Primula veris._ Primroses, or Cowslips, which you
will. The leaves help pains in the head and joints; see the flowers
which are most in use.

_Herba Paris._ Herb True-love, or One-berry. It is good for wounds,
falls, bruises, aposthumes, inflammations, ulcers in the privities.
Herb True-love, is very cold in temperature. You may take half a dram
of it at a time in powder.

_Herba Roberti._ A kind of Cranebill.

_Herba venti, Anemone._ Wind-flower. The juice snuffed up in the nose
purgeth the head, it cleanses filthy ulcers, encreases milk in nurses,
and outwardly by ointment helps leprosies.

_Herniaria._ The same with _Empetron_.

_Helxine._ Pellitory of the wall. Cold, moist, cleansing, helps the
stone and gravel in the kidnies, difficulty of urine, sore throats,
pains in the ears, the juice being dropped in them; outwardly it helps
the shingles and _St. Anthony’s fire_.

_Hyppoglossum._ Horse-tongue, Tongue-blade or Double-Tongue. The roots
help the stranguary, provoke urine, ease the hard labour of women,
provoke the menses, the herb helps ruptures and the fits of the mother:
it is hot in the second degree, dry in the first: boil it in white wine.

_Hyppolapathum._ Patience, or Monk’s Rhubarb: see the Root.

_Hypposclinum._ Alexanders, or Alisanders: provoke urine, expel the
placenta, help the stranguary, expel wind.

Sage either taken inwardly or beaten and applied plaister-wise to the
matrix, draws forth both menses and placenta.

_Horminum._ Clary: hot and dry in the third degree; helps the weakness
in the back, stops the running of the reins, and the Fluor Albus,
provokes the menses, and helps women that are barren through coldness
or moisture, or both: causes fruitfulness, but is hurtful for the
memory. The usual way of taking it is to fry it with butter, or make a
tansy with it.

_Hydropiper._ Arsmart. Hot and dry, consumes all cold swellings and
blood congealed by bruises, and stripes; applied to the place, it
helps that aposthume in the joints, commonly called a felon: strewed
in a chamber, kills all the fleas there: this is hottest Arsmart,
and is unfit to be given inwardly: there is a milder sort, called
_Persicaria_, which is of a cooler and milder quality, drying,
excellently good for putrified ulcers, kills worms: I had almost forgot
that the former is an admirable remedy for the gout, being roasted
between two tiles and applied to the grieved place, and yet I had it
from Dr. _Butler_ too.

_Hysopus._ Hysop. Helps coughs, shortness of breath, wheezing,
distillations upon the lungs: it is of a cleansing quality: kills worms
in the body, amends the whole colour of the body, helps the dropsy and
spleen, sore throats, and noise in the ears. See Syrup of Hysop.

_Hyosciamus, &c._ Henbane. The white Henbane is held to be cold in
the third degree, the black or common Henbane and the yellow, in
the fourth. They stupify the senses, and therefore not to be taken
inwardly, outwardly applied, they help inflammations, hot gouts:
applied to the temples they provoke sleep.

_Hypericon._ St. John’s Wort. It is as gallant a wound-herb as any is,
either given inwardly, or outwardly applied to the wound: it is hot and
dry, opens stoppings, helps spitting and vomiting of blood, it cleanses
the reins, provokes the menses, helps congealed blood in the stomach
and meseraic veins, the falling-sickness, palsy, cramps and aches in
the joints; you may give it in powder or any convenient decoction.

_Hypoglottis, Laurus, Alexandrina._ Laurel of Alexandria, provokes
urine and the menses, and is held to be a singular help to women in
travail.

_Hypoglossum_, the same with _Hypoglossum_ before, only different names
given by different authors, the one deriving his name from the tongue
of a horse, of which form the leaf is; the other the form of the little
leaf, because small leaves like small tongues grow upon the greater.

_Iberis Cardamantice._ Sciatica-cresses. I suppose so called because
they help the Sciatica, or Huckle-bone Gout.

_Ingumalis, Asther._ Setwort or Shartwort: being bruised and applied,
they help swellings, botches, and venerous swellings in the groin,
whence they took their name, as also inflammation and falling out of
the fundament.

_Iris._ See the roots.

_Isatis, Glastum._ Woad. Drying and binding; the side being bathed with
it, it easeth pains in the spleen, cleanseth filthy corroding gnawing
ulcers.

_Iva Arthritica._ The same with _Camæpytis_.

_Iuncus oderatus._ The same with _Schœnanthus_.

_Labrum veneris._ The same with _Dipsacus_.

_Lactuca._ Lettice. Cold and moist, cools the inflammation of the
stomach, commonly called heart-burning: provokes sleep, resists
drunkenness, and takes away the ill effects, of it; cools the blood,
quenches thirst, breeds milk, and is good for choleric bodies, and such
as have a frenzy, or are frantic. It is more wholesome eaten boiled
than raw.

_Logabus, Herba Leporina._ A kind of Trefoil growing in _France_ and
_Spain_. Let them that live there look after the virtues of it.

_Lavendula._ Lavender: Hot and dry in the third degree: the temples
and forehead bathed with the juice of it; as also the smell of the
herb helps swoonings, catalepsis, falling-sickness, provided it be not
accompanied with a fever. See the flowers.

_Laureola._ Laurel. The leaves purge upward and downward: they are good
for rheumatic people to chew in their mouths, for they draw forth much
water.

_Laurus._ Bay-tree. The leaves are hot and dry, resist drunkenness,
they gently bind and help diseases in the bladder, help the stinging of
bees and wasps, mitigate the pain of the stomach, dry and heal, open
obstructions of the liver and spleen, resist the pestilence.

_Lappa Minor._ The lesser Burdock.

_Lentiscus._ Mastich-tree. Both the leaves and bark of it stop fluxes
(being hot and dry in the second degree) spitting and evacuations of
blood, and the falling out of the fundament.

_Lens palustris._ Duckmeat: Cold and moist in the second degree, helps
inflammations, hot swellings, and the falling out of the fundament,
being warmed and applied to the place.

_Lepidium Piperites._ Dittander, Pepperwort, or Scar-wort: A hot fiery
sharp herb, admirable for the gout being applied to the place: being
only held in the hand, it helps the tooth-ache, and withall leaves a
wan colour in the hand that holds it.

_Livisticum._ Lovage. Clears the sight, takes away redness and freckles
from the face.

_Libanotis Coronaria._ See Rosemary.

_Linaria._ Toad-flax, or Wild-flax: hot and dry, cleanses the reins and
bladder, provokes urine, opens the stoppings of the liver and spleen,
and helps diseases coming thereof: outwardly it takes away yellowness
and deformity of the skin.

_Lillium convallium._ Lilly of the Valley. See the flowers.

_Lingua Cervina._ Hart’s-tongue: drying and binding, stops blood,
the menses and fluxes, opens stoppings of the liver and spleen, and
diseases thence arising. The like quantity of Hart’s-tongue, Knotgrass
and Comfrey Roots, being boiled in water, and a draught of the
decoction drunk every morning, and the materials which have boiled
applied to the place, is a notable remedy for such as are bursten.

_Limonium._ Sea-bugloss, or Marsh-bugloss, or Sea-Lavender; the seeds
being very drying and binding, stop fluxes and the menses, help the
cholic and stranguary.

_Lotus urbana._ Authors make some flutter about this herb, I conceive
the best take it to be _Trisolium Odoratum_, Sweet Trefoyl, which is of
a temperate nature, cleanses the eyes gently of such things as hinder
the sight, cures green wounds, ruptures, or burstness, helps such as
urine blood or are bruised, and secures garments from moths.

_Lupulus._ Hops. Opening, cleansing, provoke urine, the young sprouts
open stoppings of the liver and spleen, cleanse the blood, clear the
skin, help scabs and itch, help agues, purge choler: they are usually
boiled and taken as they eat asparagus, but if you would keep them,
for they are excellent for these diseases, you may make them into a
conserve, or into a syrup.

_Lychnitis Coronaria_: or as others write it, _Lychnis_. Rose Campion.
I know no great physical virtue it hath.

_Macis._ See the barks.

_Magistrantia, &c._ Masterwort. Hot and dry in the third degree: it is
good against poison, pestilence, corrupt and unwholesome air, helps
windiness in the stomach, causeth an appetite to one’s victuals, very
profitable in falls and bruises, congealed and clotted blood, the
bitings of mad-dogs; the leaves chewed in the mouth, cleanse the brain
of superfluous humours, thereby preventing lethargies, and apoplexes.

_Malva._ Mallows. The best of Authors account wild Mallows to be best,
and hold them to be cold and moist in the first degree, they are
profitable in the bitings of venomous beasts, the stinging of bees and
wasps, &c. Inwardly they resist poison, provoke to stool; outwardly
they assuage hard swellings of the privities or other places; in
clysters they help roughness and fretting of the entrails, bladder,
or fundament; and so they do being boiled in water, and the decoction
drank, as I have proved in the bloody flux.

_Majorana._ See _Amaracus_.

_Mandragora._ Mandrakes. Fit for no vulgar use, but only to be used in
cooling ointments.

_Marrubium, album, nigrum, fœtidum._

_Marrubium album_, is common Horehound. Hot in the second degree, and
dry in the third, opens the liver and spleen, cleanses the breast and
lungs, helps old coughs, pains in the sides, ptisicks, or ulceration of
the lungs, it provokes the menses, eases hard labour in child-bearing,
brings away the placenta. See the syrups.

_Marrubium, nigrum, et fœtidum._ Black and stinking Horehound, I take
to be all one. Hot and dry in the third degree; cures the bitings of
mad dogs, wastes and consumes hard knots in the fundament and matrix,
cleanses filthy ulcers.

_Marum._ Herb Mastich. Hot and dry in the third degree, good against
cramps and convulsions.

_Matricaria._ Feverfew. Hot in the third degree, dry in the second;
opens, purges; a singular remedy for diseases incident to the matrix,
and other diseases incident to women, eases their travail, and
infirmities coming after it; it helps the vertigo or dissiness of the
head, melancholy sad thoughts: you may boil it either alone, or with
other herbs fit for the same purpose, with which this treatise will
furnish you; applied to the wrists, it helps the ague.

_Matrisylva._ The same with _Caprifolium_.

_Meliotus._ Melilot. Inwardly taken, provokes urine, breaks the Stone,
cleanses the reins and bladder, cutteth and cleanses the lungs of
tough flegm, the juice dropped into the eyes, clears the sight, into
the ears, mitigates pain and noise there; the head bathed with the
juice mixed with vinegar, takes away the pains thereof: outwardly in
pultisses, it assuages swellings in the privities and elsewhere.

_Mellissa._ Balm. Hot and dry: outwardly mixed with salt and applied to
the neck, helps the King’s-evil, bitings of mad dogs, venomous beasts,
and such as cannot hold their neck as they should do; inwardly it is
an excellent remedy for a cold and moist stomach, cheers the heart,
refreshes the mind, takes away griefs, sorrow, and care, instead of
which it produces joy and mirth. See the syrup. _Galen, Avicenna._

_Mentha sativa._ Garden Mints, Spear Mints. Are hot and dry in the
third degree, provoke hunger, are wholesome for the stomach, stay
vomiting, stop the menses, help sore heads in children, strengthen the
stomach, cause digestion; outwardly applied, they help the bitings of
mad-dogs: Yet they hinder conception.

_Memtha aquatica._ Water Mints: Ease pains of the belly, head-ache, and
vomiting, gravel in the kidnies and stone.

_Methastrum._ Horse-mint. I know no difference between them and water
mints.

_Mercurialis, mas, fœmina._ Mercury male and female, they are both hot
and dry in the second degree, cleansing, digesting, they purge watery
humours, and further conception.

_Mezereon._ Spurge-Olive, or Widdow-wail. A dangerous purge, better let
alone than meddled with.

_Millefolium._ Yarrow. Meanly cold and binding, an healing herb for
wounds, stanches bleeding; and some say the juice snuffed up the nose,
causeth it to bleed, whence it was called, Nose-bleed; it stops lasks,
and the menses, helps the running of the reins, helps inflammations and
excoriations of the priapus, as also inflammations of wounds. _Galen._

_Muscus._ Mosse. Is something cold and binding, yet usually retains a
smatch of the property of the tree it grows on; therefore that which
grows upon oaks is very dry and binding. _Serapio_ saith that it being
infused in wine, and the wine drank, it stays vomiting and fluxes, as
also the Fluor Albus.

_Myrtus._ Myrtle-tree. The leaves are of a cold earthly quality, drying
and binding, good for fluxes, spitting and vomiting of blood; stop the
Fluor Albus and menses.

_Nardus._ See the root.

_Nasturtium, Aquaticum, Hortense._ Water cresses, and Garden-cresses.
Garden-cresses are hot and dry in the fourth degree, good for the
scurvy, sciatica, hard swellings, yet do they trouble the belly, ease
pains of the spleen, provoke lust. _Dioscorides._ Water-cresses are
hot and dry, cleanse the blood, help the scurvy, provoke urine and the
menses, break the stone, help the green-sickness, cause a fresh lively
colour.

_Nasturtium Alhum, Thlaspie._ Treacle-mustard. Hot and dry in the third
degree, purges violently, dangerous for pregnant women. Outwardly it is
applied with profit to the gout.

_Nicorimi._ Tobacco. It is hot and dry in the second degree, and of
a cleansing nature: the leaves warmed and applied to the head, are
excellently good in inveterate head-aches and megrims, if the diseases
come through cold or wind, change them often till the diseases be gone,
help such whose necks be stiff: it eases the faults of the breast:
Asthma’s or head-flegm in the lappets of the lungs: eases the pains
of the stomach and windiness thereof: being heated by the fire, and
applied hot to the side, they loosen the belly, and kill worms being
applied unto it in like manner: they break the stone being applied
in like manner to the region of the bladder: help the rickets, being
applied to the belly and sides: applied to the navel, they give present
ease to the fits of the mother: they take away cold aches in the joints
applied to them: boiled, the liquor absolutely and speedily cures scabs
and itch: neither is there any better salve in the world for wounds
than may be made of it: for it cleanses, fetches out the filth though
it lie in the bones, brings up the flesh from the bottom, and all this
it doth speedily: it cures wounds made with poisoned weapons, and for
this _Clusius_ brings many experiences too tedious here to relate.
It is an admirable thing for carbuncles and plague-sores, inferior
to none: green wounds ’twill cure in a trice: ulcers and gangreens
very speedily, not only in men, but also in beasts, therefore the
Indians dedicated it to their god. Taken in a pipe, it hath almost as
many virtues; it easeth weariness, takes away the sense of hunger and
thirst, provokes to stool: he saith, the Indians will travel four days
without either meat or drink, by only chewing a little of this in their
mouths: It eases the body of superfluous humours, opens stoppings. See
the ointment of Tobacco.

_Nummularia._ Money-wort, or Herb Two-pence; cold, dry, binding, helps
fluxes, stops the menses, helps ulcers in the lungs; outwardly it is a
special herb for wounds.

_Nymphea._ See the flowers.

_Ocynum._ Basil, hot and moist. The best use that I know of it, is, it
gives speedy deliverance to women in travail. Let them not take above
half a dram of it at a time in powder, and be sure also the birth be
ripe, else it causes abortion.

_Oleæ folia._ Olive leaves: they are hard to come by here.

_Ononis._ Restharrow. See the roots.

_Ophioglossum._ Adder’s-tongue. The leaves are very drying: being
boiled in oil they make a dainty green balsam for green wounds: taken
inwardly, they help inward wounds.

_Origanum._ Origany: a kind of wild Marjoram; hot and dry in the third
degree, helps the bitings of venomous beasts, such as have taken Opium,
Hemlock, or Poppy; provokes urine, brings down the menses, helps old
coughs; in an ointment it helps scabs and itch.

_Oxylapathum._ Sorrel. See _Acetosa_.

_Papaver, &c._ Poppies, white, black, or erratick. I refer you to the
syrups of each.

_Parietaria._ Given once before under the name of _Helxine_.

_Pastinæa._ Parsnips. See the roots.

_Persicaria._ See _Hydropiper_. This is the milder sort of Arsmart I
described there: If ever you find it amongst the compounds, take it
under that notion.

_Pentaphyllium._ Cinquefoil: very drying, yet but meanly hot, if at
all; helps ulcers in the mouth, roughness of the wind-pipe (whence
comes hoarsness and coughs, &c.) helps fluxes, creeping ulcers, and
the yellow jaundice; they say one leaf cures a quotidian ague, three
a tertain, and four a quartan. I know it will cure agues without this
curiosity, if a wise man have the handling of it; otherwise a cart load
will not do it.

_Petroselinum._ Parsley. See Smallage.

_Per Columbinus._ See _Geranium_.

_Persicarium folia._ Peach Leaves: they are a gentle, yet a complete
purger of choler, and disease coming from thence; fit for children
because of their gentleness. You may boil them in white wine: a
handfull is enough at a time.

_Pilosella._ Mouse-ear: once before and this is often enough.

_Pithyusa._ A new name for Spurge of the last Edition.

_Plantago._ Plantain. Cold and dry; an herb, though common, yet let
none despise it, for the decoction of it prevails mightily against
tormenting pains and excoriations of the entrails, bloody fluxes, it
stops the menses, and spitting of blood, phthisicks, or consumptions
of the lungs, the running of the reins, and the Fluor Albus, pains
in the head, and frenzies: outwardly it clears the sight, takes away
inflammations, scabs, itch, the shingles, and all spreading sores,
and is as wholesome an herb as can grow about any an house. _Tragus,
Dioscorides._

_Polium, &c._ Polley, or Pellamountain: All the sorts are hot in
the second degree, and dry in the third: helps dropsies, the yellow
jaundice, infirmities of the spleen, and provokes urine. _Dioscorides._

_Polygonum._ Knotgrass.

_Polytricum._ Maidenhair.

_Portulaca._ Purslain: Cold and moist in the second or third degree:
cools hot stomachs, and it is admirable for one that hath his teeth on
edge by eating sour apples, it cools the blood, liver, and is good for
hot diseases, or inflammations in any of these places, stops fluxes,
and the menses, and helps all inward inflammations whatsoever.

_Porrum._ Leeks. See the roots.

_Primula Veris._ See Cowslips, or the Flowers, which you will.

_Prunella._ Self-heal, Carpenter’s-herb, and Sicklewort. Moderately hot
and dry, binding. See Bugle, the virtues being the same.

_Pulegium._ Pennyroyal; hot and dry in the third degree; provokes
urine, breaks the stone in the reins, strengthens women’s backs,
provokes the menses, easeth their labour in child-bed, brings away the
placenta, stays vomiting, strengthens the brain, breaks wind, and helps
the vertigo.

_Pulmonaria, arborea, et Symphytum maculosum._ Lung-wort. It helps
infirmities of the lungs, as hoarsness, coughs, wheezing, shortness of
breath, &c. You may boil it in Hyssop-water, or any other water that
strengthens the lungs.

_Pulicaria._ Fleabane; hot and dry in the third degree, helps the
biting of venomous beasts, wounds and swellings, the yellow jaundice,
the falling sickness, and such as cannot make water; being burnt,
the smoak of it kills all the gnats and fleas in the chamber; it is
dangerous for pregnant women.

_Pyrus sylvestris._ Wild Pear-tree. I know no virtue in the leaves.

_Pyrola._ Winter-green. Cold and dry, and very binding, stops fluxes,
and the menses, and is admirably good in green wounds.

_Quercus folia._ Oak Leaves: Are much of the nature of the former, stay
the Fluor Albus. See the bark.

_Ranunculus._ Hath got a sort of English Names: Crowfoot, King-kob,
Gold-cups, Gold-knobs, Butter-flowers, &c. they are of a notable hot
quality, unfit to be taken inwardly: If you bruise the roots and apply
them to a plague-sore, they are notable things to draw the venom to
them.

_Raparum folia._ If they do mean Turnip leaves, when they are young
and tender, they are held to provoke urine.

_Rosmarirum._ Rosemary, hot and dry in the second degree, binding,
stops fluxes, helps stuffings in the head, the yellow jaundice, helps
the memory, expels wind. See the flowers. _Serapio, Dioscorides._

_Rosa solis._ See the water.

_Rosa alba, rubra, Damascena._ White, Red, and Damask Roses.

_Rumex._ Dock; All the ordinary sort of Docks are of a cool and drying
substance, and therefore stop fluxes; and the leaves are seldom used in
physic.

_Rubus Idæus_: Raspis, Raspberries, or Hind-berries: I know no great
virtues in the leaves.

_Ruta._ Rue, or Herb of Grace; hot and dry in the third degree,
consumes the seed, and is an enemy to generation, helps difficulty
of breathing, and inflammations of the lungs, pains in the sides,
inflammations of the priapus and matrix, naught for pregnant women: no
herb resists poison more. It strengthens the heart exceedingly, and no
herb better than this in pestilential times, take it what manner you
will or can.

_Ruta Muraria._ See _Adianthum_.

_Sabina._ Savin: hot and dry in the third degree, potently provokes
the menses, expels both birth and afterbirth, they (boiled in oil and
used in ointments) stay creeping ulcers, scour away spots, freckles and
sunburning from the face; the belly anointed with it kills worms in
children.

_Salvia._ Sage: hot and dry in the second or third degree, binding,
it stays abortion in such women as are subject to come before their
times, it causes fruitfulness, it is singularly good for the brain,
strengthens the senses and memory, helps spitting and vomiting of
blood: outwardly, heat hot with a little vinegar and applied to the
side, helps stitches and pains in the sides.

_Salix._ Willow leaves, are cold, dry, and binding, stop spitting of
blood, and fluxes; the boughs stuck about a chamber, wonderfully cool
the air, and refresh such as have fevers; the leaves applied to the
head, help hot diseases there, and frenzies.

_Sampsucum._ Marjoram.

_Sunicula._ Sanicle; hot and dry in the second degree, cleanses wounds
and ulcers.

_Saponaria._ Sope-wort, or Bruise-wort, vulgarly used in bruises and
cut fingers, and is of notable use in the veneral disease.

_Satureia._ Savory. Summer savory is hot and dry in the third degree,
Winter savory is not so hot, both of them expel wind.

_Sazifragia alba._ White Saxifrage, breaks wind, helps the cholic and
stone.

_Scabiosa._ Scabious: hot and dry in the second degree, cleanses the
breast and lungs, helps old rotten coughs, and difficulty of breathing,
provokes urine, and cleanses the bladder of filthy stuff, breaks
aposthumes, and cures scabs and itch. Boil it in white wine.

_Scariola._ An Italian name for Succory.

_Schœnanthus._ Schœnanth, Squinanth, or Chamel’s hay; hot and binding.
It digests and opens the passages of the veins: surely it is as great
an expeller of wind as any is.

_Scordium._ Water-Germander, hot and dry, cleanses ulcers in the inward
parts, it provokes urine and the menses, opens stopping of the liver,
spleen, reins, bladder, and matrix, it is a great counter poison, and
eases the breast oppressed with flegm: see Diascordium.

_Scrophularia._ Figwort, so called of _Scrophula_, the King’s Evil,
which it cures they say, by being only hung about the neck. If not,
bruise it, and apply it to the place, it helps the piles or hemorrhoids.

_Sedum._ And all his sorts: see _Barba Jovis_.

_Senna._ It heats in the second degree and dries in the first,
cleanses, purges and digests; it carries downward both choler, flegm,
and melancholy, it cleanses the brain, heart, liver, spleen; it cheers
the senses, opens obstructions, takes away dulness of sight, helps
deafness, helps melancholy and madness, resists resolution of the
nerves, pains of the head, scabs, itch, falling-sickness, the windiness
of it is corrected with a little ginger. You may boil half an ounce of
it at a time, in water or white wine, but boil it not too much; half an
ounce is a moderate dose to be boiled for any reasonable body.

_Serpillum._ Mother-of-Time, with Time; it is hot and dry in the third
degree, it provokes the menses, and helps the stranguary or stoppage of
urine, gripings in the belly, ruptures, convulsions, inflammation of
the liver, lethargy, and infirmities of the spleen, boil it in white
wine. _Ætius, Galen._

_Sigillum Solomonis._ Solomon’s seal. See the root.

_Smyrnium._ Alexander of _Crete_.

_Solanum._ Night-shade: very cold and dry, binding; it is somewhat
dangerous given inwardly, unless by a skilful hand; outwardly it helps
the Shingles, _St. Anthony’s_ fire, and other hot inflammations.

_Soldanella._ Bindweed, hot and dry in the second degree, it opens
obstructions of the liver, and purges watery humours, and is therefore
very profitable in dropsies, it is very hurtful to the stomach,
and therefore if taken inwardly it had need be well corrected with
cinnamon, ginger, or annis-seed, &c.

_Sonchus levis Asper._ Sow-thistles smooth and rough, they are of a
cold, watery, yet binding quality, good for frenzies, they increase
milk in nurses, and cause the children which they nurse to have a good
colour, help gnawings of the stomach coming of a hot cause; outwardly
they help inflammations, and hot swellings, cool the heat of the
fundament and privities.

_Sophi Chirurgorum._ Fluxweed: drying without any manifest heat or
coldness; it is usually found about old ruinous buildings; it is so
called because of its virtue in stopping fluxes.

_Shinachia._ Spinage. I never read any physical virtues of it.

_Spina Alba._ See the root.

_Spica._ See _Nardus_.

_Stæbe._ Silver Knapweed: The virtues be the same with Scabious, and
some think the herbs too; though I am of another opinion.

_Stœchas._ French Lavender. Cassidony, is a great counterpoison, opens
obstructions of the liver and spleen, cleanses the matrix and bladder,
brings out corrupt humours, provokes urine.

_Succisa, Marsus Diaboli._ Devil’s-bit. Hot and dry in the second
degree: inwardly taken, it eases the fits of the mother, and breaks
wind, takes away swellings in the mouth, and slimy flegm that stick to
the jaws, neither is there a more present remedy in the world for those
cold swellings in the neck which the vulgar call the almonds of the
ears, than this herb bruised and applied to them.

_Suchaha._ An Egyptian Thorn. Very hard, if not impossible to come by
here.

_Tanacetum._ Tansy: hot in the second degree and dry in the third; the
very smell of it stays abortion, or miscarriages in women; so it doth
being bruised and applied to their navels, provokes urine, and is a
special help against the gout.

_Taraxacon._ Dandelion, or to write better French, Dent-de-lion, for in
plain English, it is called lyon’s tooth; it is a kind of Succory, and
thither I refer you.

_Tamariscus._ Tamiris. It hath a dry cleansing quality, and hath a
notable virtue against the rickets, and infirmities of the spleen,
provokes the menses. _Galen, Dioscorides._

_Telephium._ A kind of Opine.

_Thlaspi._ See _Nasturtium_.

_Thymbra._ A wild Savory.

_Thymum._ Thyme. Hot and dry in the third degree; helps coughs and
shortness of breath, provokes the menses, brings away dead children and
the after birth; purges flegm, cleanses the breast and lungs, reins and
matrix; helps the sciatica, pains in the breast, expels wind in any
part of the body, resists fearfulness and melancholy, continual pains
in the head, and is profitable for such as have the falling-sickness to
smell to.

_Thymælea._ The Greek name for Spurge-Olive: _Mezereon_ being the
Arabick name.

_Tithymallus, Esula, &c._ Spurge. Hot and dry in the fourth degree:
a dogged purge, better let alone than taken inwardly: hair anointed
with the juice of it will fall off: it kills fish, being mixed with
any thing that they will eat: outwardly it cleanses ulcers, takes away
freckles, sunburning and morphew from the face.

_Tormentilla._ See the root.

_Trinitatis herba._ Pansies, or Heart’s-ease: They are cold and moist,
both herbs and flowers, excellent against inflammations of the breast
or lungs, convulsions or falling-sickness, also they are held to be
good for venereal complaints.

_Trifolium._ Trefoil: dry in the third degree, and cold: The ordinary
Meadow Trefoil, cleanses the bowels of slimy humours that stick to
them, being used either in drinks or clysters; outwardly they take away
inflammations.

_Tussilago._ Colt’s-foot: something cold and dry, and therefore good
for inflammations, they are admirably good for coughs, and consumptions
of the lungs, shortness of breath, &c. It is often used and with good
success taken in a tobacco-pipe, being cut and mixed with a little oil
of annis seeds. See the Syrup of Colt’s-foot.

_Valeriana._ Valerian, or Setwall. See the roots.

_Verbascum, Thapsus Barbatus._ Mullin, or Higtaper. It is something
dry, and of a digesting, cleansing quality, stops fluxes and the
hemorrhoids, it cures hoarseness, the cough, and such as are broken
winded.

_Verbena._ Vervain: hot and dry, a great opener, cleanser, healer, it
helps the yellow jaundice, defects in the reins and bladder, pains in
the head; if it be but bruised and hung about the neck, all diseases in
the privities; made into an ointment it is a sovereign remedy for old
head-aches, as also frenzies, it clears the skin, and causes a lovely
colour.

_Veronica._ See _Betonica Pauli_.

_Violaria._ Violet Leaves: they are cool, ease pains in the head
proceeding of heat and frenzies, either inwardly taken, or outwardly
applied; heat of the stomach, or inflammation of the lungs.

_Vitis Viniseria._ The manured Vine: the leaves are binding and cool
withal; the burnt ashes of the sticks of a vine, scour the teeth
and make them as white as snow; the leaves stop bleeding, fluxes,
heart-burnings, vomitings; as also the longings of pregnant women. The
coals of a burnt Vine, in powder, mixed with honey, doth make the teeth
as white as ivory, which are rubbed with it.

_Vincitoxicum._ Swallow-wort. A pultis made with the leaves helps sore
breasts, and also soreness of the matrix.

_Virga Pastoris._ A third name for Teazles. See _Dipsatus_.

_Virga Aurea._ See _Consolida_.

_Ulmaria._ See the root. _Meadsweet._

_Umbilicus Veneris._ Navil-wort: Cold, dry, and binding, therefore
helps all inflammations; they are very good for kibed heels, being
bathed with it and a leaf laid over the sore.

_Urtica._ Nettles: an herb so well known, that you may find them by the
feeling in the darkest night: they are something hot, not very hot; the
juice stops bleeding; they provoke lust, help difficulty of breathing,
pleurisies, inflammations of the lungs, that troublesome cough that
women call the Chincough; they exceedingly break the stone, provoke
urine, and help such as cannot hold their necks upright. Boil them in
white wine.

_Usnea._ Moss; once before.


FLOWERS.

BORAGE, and Bugloss flowers strengthen the brain, and are profitable in
fevers.

_Chamomel flowers_, heat and assuage swellings, inflammation of the
bowels, dissolve wind, are profitably given in clysters or drink, to
such as are troubled with the cholic, or stone.

_Stæchea_, opens stoppings in the bowels, and strengthens the whole
body.

_Saffron_ powerfully concocts, and sends out whatever humour offends
the body, drives back inflammations; applied outwardly, encreases
venery, and provokes urine.

_Clove-Gilliflowers_, resist the pestilence, strengthen the heart,
liver, and stomach, and provoke venery.

_Schœnanth_ (which I touched slightly amongst the herbs) provokes urine
potently, provokes the menses, breaks wind, helps such as spit or vomit
blood, eases pains of the stomach, reins, and spleen, helps dropsies,
convulsions, and inflammations of the womb.

_Lavender-flowers_, resist all cold afflictions of the brain,
convulsions, falling-sickness, they strengthen cold stomachs, and open
obstructions of the liver, they provoke urine and the menses, bring
forth the birth and placenta.

_Hops_, open stoppings of the bowels, and for that cause beer is better
than ale.

_Balm-flowers_, cheer the heart and vital spirits, strengthen the
stomach.

_Rosemary-flowers_, strengthen the brain exceedingly, and resist
madness; clear the sight.

_Winter-Gilliflowers_, or Wall-flowers, help inflammation of the womb,
provoke the menses, and help ulcers in the mouth.

_Honey-suckles_, provoke urine, ease the pains of the spleen, and such
as can hardly fetch their breath.

_Mallows_, help coughs.

_Red Roses_, cool, bind, strengthen both vital and animal virtue,
restore such as are in consumptions, strengthen. There are so many
compositions of them which makes me more brief in the simples.

_Violets_, (to wit, the blue ones,) cool and moisten, provoke sleep,
loosen the belly, resist fevers, help inflammations, correct the heat
of choler, ease the pains in the head, help the roughness of the
wind-pipe, diseases in the throat, inflammations in the breast and
sides, plurisies, open stoppings of the liver, and help the yellow
jaundice.

_Chicory_, (or Succory as the vulgar call it) cools and strengthens the
liver, so doth Endive.

_Water lilies_, ease pains of the head coming of choler and heat,
provoke sleep, cool inflammations, and the heat in fevers.

_Pomegranate-flowers_, dry and bind, stop fluxes, and the menses.

_Cowslips_, strengthen the brain, senses, and memory, exceedingly,
resist all diseases there, as convulsions, falling-sickness, palsies,
&c.

_Centaury_, purges choler and gross humours, helps the yellow jaundice,
opens obstructions of the liver, helps pains of the spleen, provokes
the menses, brings away birth and afterbirth.

_Elder flowers_, help dropsies, cleanse the blood, clear the skin, open
stoppings of the liver and spleen, and diseases arising therefrom.

_Bean-flowers_, clear the skin, stop humours flowing into the eyes.

_Peach-tree_ flowers, purge choler gently.

_Broom-flowers_, purge water, and are good in dropsies.

The temperature of all these differ either very little or not at all
from the herbs.

The way of using the flowers I did forbear, because most of them may,
and are usually made into conserves, of which you may take the quantity
of a nutmeg in the morning; all of them may be kept dry a year, and
boiled with other herbs conducing to the cures they do.


FRUITS AND THEIR BUDS.

_Green Figs_, are held to be of ill juice, but the best is, we are not
much troubled with them in _England_; dry figs help coughs, cleanse
the breast, and help infirmities of the lungs, shortness of wind, they
loose the belly, purge the reins, help inflammations of the liver and
spleen; outwardly they dissolve swellings.

_Pine-nuts_, restore such as are in consumptions, amend the failings of
the lungs, concoct flegm, and yet are naught for such as are troubled
with the head-ache.

_Dates_, are binding, stop eating ulcers being applied to them; they
are very good for weak stomachs, for they soon digest, and breed good
nourishment, they help infirmities of the reins, bladder, and womb.

_Sebestens_, cool choler, violent heat of the stomach, help roughness
of the tongue and wind-pipe, cool the reins and bladder.

_Raisins of the Sun_, help infirmities of the breast and liver, restore
consumptions, gently cleanse and move to stool.

_Walnuts_, kill worms, resist the pestilence, (I mean the green ones,
not the dry.)

_Capers_ eaten before meals, provoke hunger.

_Nutmegs_, strengthen the brain, stomach, and liver, provoke urine,
ease the pains of the spleen, stop looseness, ease pains of the head,
and pains in the joints, strengthen the body, take away weakness coming
of cold, and cause a sweet breath.

_Cloves_, help digestion, stop looseness, provoke lust, and quicken the
sight.

_Pepper_, binds, expels wind, helps the cholic, quickens digestion
oppressed with cold, heats the stomach.

_Quinces._ See the Compositions.

_Pears_ are grateful to the stomach, drying, and therefore help fluxes.

All plums that are sharp or sour, are binding, the sweet are loosening.

_Cucumbers_, cool the stomach, and are good against ulcers in the
bladder.

_Galls_, are exceeding binding, help ulcers in the mouth, wasting of
the gums, ease the pains of the teeth, help the falling out of the womb
and fundament, make the hair black.

_Pompions_ are a cold and moist fruit, of small nourishment, they
provoke urine, outwardly applied; the flesh of them helps inflammations
and burnings; applied to the forehead they help inflammations of the
eyes.

_Melons_, have few other virtues.

_Apricots_, are very grateful to the stomach, and dry up the humours
thereof. _Peaches_ are held to do the like.

_Cubebs_, are hot and dry in the third degree, they expel wind, and
cleanse the stomach of tough and viscous humours, they ease the pains
of the spleen, and help cold diseases of the womb, they cleanse the
head of flegm and strengthen the brain, they heat the stomach and
provoke venery.

_Bitter Almonds_, are hot in the first degree and dry in the second,
they cleanse and cut thick humours, cleanse the lungs, and eaten every
morning, they are held to preserve from drunkenness.

_Bay-berries_, heat, expel wind, mitigate pain; are excellent for cold
infirmities of the womb, and dropsies.

_Cherries_, are of different qualities according to their different
taste, the sweet are quickest of digestion, but the sour are more
pleasing to a hot stomach, and procure appetite to one’s meat.

_Medlars_, are strengthening to the stomach, binding, and the green are
more binding than the rotten, and the dry than the green.

_Olives_, cool and bind.

_English-currants_, cool the stomach, and are profitable in acute
fevers, they quench thirst, resist vomiting, cool the heat of choler,
provoke appetite, and are good for hot complexions.

_Services_, or Chockers are of the nature of Medlars, but something
weaker in operation.

_Barberries_, quench thirst, cool the heat of choler, resist the
pestilence, stay vomiting and fluxes, stop the menses, kill worms, help
spitting of blood, fasten the teeth, and strengthen the gums.

_Strawberries_, cool the stomach, liver, and blood, but are very
hurtful for such as have agues.

_Winter-Cherries_, potently provoke urine, and break the stone.

_Cassia-fistula_, is temperate in quality, gently purgeth choler and
flegm, clarifies the blood, resists fevers, cleanses the breast and
lungs, it cools the reins, and thereby resists the breeding of the
stone, it provokes urine, and therefore is exceeding good for the
running of the reins in men, and the Fluor Albus in women.

All the sorts or _Myrobalans_, purge the stomach; the Indian
Myrobalans, are held to purge melancholy most especially, the other
flegm; yet take heed you use them not in stoppings of the bowels: they
are cold and dry, they all strengthen the heart, brain, and sinews,
strengthen the stomach, relieve the senses, take away tremblings and
heart-qualms. They are seldom used alone.

_Prunes_, are cooling and loosening.

_Tamarinds_, are cold and dry in the second degree, they purge choler,
cool the blood, stay vomiting, help the yellow jaundice, quench thirst,
cool hot stomachs, and hot livers.

I omit the use of these also as resting confident a child of three
years old, if you should give it Raisins of the sun or Cherries would
not ask how it should take them.


SEEDS OR GRAINS.

_Coriander_ seed, hot and dry, expels wind, but is hurtful to the head;
sends up unwholesome vapours to the brain, dangerous for mad people.

_Fenugreek_ seeds, are of a softening, discussing nature, they cease
inflammations, be they internal or external: bruised and mixed with
vinegar they ease the pains of the spleen: being applied to the sides,
help hardness and swellings of the matrix, being boiled, the decoction
helps scabby heads.

_Lin-seed_ hath the same virtues with Fenugreek.

_Gromwell_ seed, provokes urine, helps the cholic, breaks the stone,
and expels wind. Boil them in white wine; but bruise them first.

_Lupines_, ease the pains of the spleen, kill worms and cast them out:
outwardly, they cleanse filthy ulcers, and gangrenes, help scabs, itch,
and inflammations.

_Dill_ seed, encreases milk in nurses, expels wind, stays vomitings,
provokes urine; yet it dulls the sight, and is an enemy to generation.

_Smallage_ seed, provokes urine and the menses, expels wind, resists
poison, and eases inward pains, it opens stoppings in any part of the
body, yet it is hurtful for such as have the falling-sickness, and for
pregnant women.

_Rocket_ seed, provokes urine, stirs up lust, encreases seed, kills
worms, eases pains of the spleen. Use all these in like manner.

_Basil_ seed: If we may believe _Dioscorides_ and _Crescentius_, cheers
the heart, and strengthens a moist stomach, drives away melancholy, and
provokes urine.

_Nettle_ seed, provokes venery, opens stoppages of the womb, helps
inflammations of the sides and lungs; purgeth the breast: boil them
(being bruised) in white wine also.

The seeds of _Ammi_, or _Bishop’s-weed_, heat and dry, help difficulty
of urine, and the pains of the cholic, the bitings of venomous beasts;
they provoke the menses, and purge the womb.

_Annis_ seeds, heat and dry, ease pain, expel wind, cause a sweet
breath, help the dropsy, resist poison, breed milk, and stop the Fluor
Albus in women, provoke venery, and ease the head-ache.

_Cardamoms_, heat, kill worms, cleanse the reins, and provoke urine.

_Fennel_ seed, breaks wind, provokes urine and the menses, encreases
milk in nurses.

_Cummin_ seed, heat, bind, and dry, stop blood, expel wind, ease
pain, help the bitings of venomous beast: outwardly applied (viz. in
Plaisters) they are of a discussing nature.

_Carrot_ seeds, are windy, provoke lust exceedingly, and encrease
seed, provoke urine and the menses, cause speedy delivery to women in
travail, and bring away the placenta. All these also may be boiled in
white wine.

_Nigella_ seeds, boiled in oil, and the forehead anointed with it,
ease pains in the head, take away leprosy, itch, scurf, and help scald
heads: Inwardly taken they expel worms, they provoke urine, and the
menses, help difficulty of breathing.

_Stavesacre_, kills lice in the head, I hold it not fitting to be given
inwardly.

_Olibanum_ mixed with as much Barrow’s Grease (beat the Olibanum first
in powder) and boiled together, make an ointment which will kill the
lice in children’s heads, and such as are subject to breed them, will
never breed them. A Medicine cheap, safe, and sure, which breeds no
annoyance to the brain.

The seeds of _Water-cresses_, heat, yet trouble the stomach and belly;
ease the pains of the spleen, are very dangerous for pregnant women,
yet they provoke lust: outwardly applied, they help leprosies, scald
heads, and the falling off of hair, as also carbuncles, and cold ulcers
in the joints.

_Mustard_ seed, heats, extenuates, and draws moisture from the brain:
the head being shaved and anointed with Mustard, is a good remedy for
the lethargy, it helps filthy ulcers, and hard swellings in the mouth,
it helps old aches coming of cold.

_French Barley_, is cooling, nourishing, and breeds milk.

_Sorrel_ seeds, potently resist poison, help fluxes, and such stomachs
as loath their meat.

_Succory_ seed, cools the heat of the blood, extinguishes lust, opens
stoppings of the liver and bowels, it allays the heat of the body, and
produces a good colour, it strengthens the stomach, liver, and reins.

_Poppy_ seeds, ease pain, provoke sleep. Your best way is to make an
emulsion of them with barley water.

_Mallow_ seeds, ease pains in the bladder.

_Chich-pease_, are windy, provoke lust, encrease milk in nurses,
provoke the menses, outwardly, they help scabs, itch, and inflammations
of the testicles, ulcers, &c.

_White Saxifrage_ seeds, provoke urine, expel wind, and break the
stone. Boil them in white wine.

_Rue_ seeds, helps such as cannot hold their water.

_Lettice_ seed, cools the blood, restrains venery.

Also _Gourds, Citruls, Cucumbers, Melons, Purslain, and Endive_ seeds,
cool the blood, as also the stomach, spleen, and reins, and allay the
heat of fevers. Use them as you were taught to do poppy-seeds.

_Wormseed_, expels wind, kills worms.

_Ash-tree Keys_, ease pains in the sides, help the dropsy, relieve men
weary with labour, provoke venery, and make the body lean.

_Piony_ seeds, help the _Ephialtes_, or the disease the vulgar call the
Mare, as also the fits of the mother, and other such like infirmities
of the womb, stop the menses, and help convulsions.

_Broom_ seed, potently provoke urine, break the stone.

_Citron_ seeds, strengthen the heart, cheer the vital spirit, resist
pestilence and poison.


TEARS, LIQUORS, AND ROZINS.

_Laudanum_, is of a heating, mollifying nature, it opens the mouth of
the veins, stays the hair from falling off, helps pains in the ears,
and hardness of the womb. It is used only outwardly in plaisters.

_Assafœtida._ Is commonly used to allay the fits of the mother by
smelling to it; they say, inwardly taken, it provokes lust, and expels
wind.

_Benzoin_, or _Benjamin_, makes a good perfume.

_Sanguis Draconis_, cools and binds exceedingly.

_Aloes_, purges choler and flegm, and with such deliberation that it
is often given to withstand the violence of other purges, it preserves
the senses and betters the apprehension, it strengthens the liver, and
helps the yellow-jaundice. Yet is naught for such as are troubled with
the hemorrhoids, or have agues. I do not like it taken raw. See Aloe
Rosata, which is nothing but it washed with the juice of roses.

_Manna_, is temperately hot, of a mighty dilative quality, windy,
cleanses choler gently, also it cleanses the throat and stomach. A
child may take an ounce of it at a time melted in milk, and the dross
strained out, it is good for them when they are scabby.

_Scamony_, or _Diagridium_, call it by which name you please, is a
desperate purge, hurtful to the body by reason of its heat, windiness,
corroding, or gnawing, and violence of working. I would advise my
countrymen to let it alone; it will gnaw their bodies as fast as
doctors gnaw their purses.

_Opopanax_, is of a heating, molifying, digesting quality.

_Gum Elemi_, is exceeding good for fractures of the skull, as also in
wounds, and therefore is put in plaisters for that end. See _Arceus_
his Liniment.

_Tragacanthum_, commonly called Gum Traganth, and Gum Dragon, helps
coughs, hoarseness, and distillations on the lungs.

_Bdellium_, heats and softens, helps hard swellings, ruptures, pains in
the sides, hardness of the sinews.

_Galbanum._ Hot and dry, discussing; applied to the womb, it hastens
both birth and after-birth, applied to the navel it stays the
strangling of the womb, commonly called the fits of the mother, helps
pains in the sides, and difficulty of breathing, being applied to it,
and the smell of it helps the vertigo or diziness in the head.

_Myrh_, heats and dries, opens and softens the womb, provokes the birth
and after-birth; inwardly taken, it helps old coughs and hoarseness,
pains in the sides, kills worms, and helps a stinking breath, helps the
wasting of the gums, fastens the teeth: outwardly it helps wounds, and
fills up ulcers with flesh. You may take half a dram at a time.

_Mastich_, strengthens the stomach exceedingly, helps such as vomit or
spit blood, it fastens the teeth and strengthens the gums, being chewed
in the mouth.

_Frankinsense_, and _Olibanum_, heat and bind, fill up old ulcers with
flesh, stop bleeding, but is extremely bad for mad people.

_Turpentine_, Purges, cleanses the reins, helps the running of them.

_Styrax Calamitis_, helps coughs, and distillations upon the lungs,
hoarseness, want of voice, hardness of the womb, but it is bad for
head-aches.

_Ammonicaum_, applied to the side, helps the hardness and pains of the
spleen.

_Camphire_, eases pains of the head coming of heat, takes away
inflammations, and cools any place to which it is applied.


    JUICES.

THAT all juices have the same virtues with the herbs or fruits whereof
they are made, I suppose few or none will deny, therefore I shall only
name a few of them, and that briefly.

_Sugar_ is held to be hot in the first degree, strengthens the lungs,
takes away the roughness of the throat, succours the reins and bladder.

The juice of _Citrons_ cools the blood, strengthens the heart,
mitigates the violent heat of fevers.

The juice of _Lemons_ works the same effect, but not so powerfully.

Juice of _Liquorice_, strengthens the lungs, helps coughs and colds.


    THINGS BRED FROM PLANTS.

_These have been treated of before, only two excepted. The first of
which is,_

Agaricus. _Agarick: It purges flegm, choler, and melancholy, from the
brain, nerves, muscles, marrow, (or more properly brain) of the back,
it cleanses the breast, lungs, liver, stomach, spleen, reins, womb,
joints; it provokes urine, and the menses, kills worms, helps pains in
the joints, and causes a good colour: it is very seldom or never taken
alone. See Syrup of Roses with Agarick._

_Lastly, _Vicus Quircinus_, or Misleto of the Oak, helps the
falling-sickness being either taken inwardly, or hung about one’s
neck._




    LIVING CREATURES.


Millepedes _(so called from the multitude of their feet, though it
cannot be supposed they have a thousand) sows, hog-lice, wood-lice,
being bruised and mixed with wine, they provoke urine, help the yellow
jaundice, outwardly being boiled in oil, help pains in the ears, a drop
being put into them_.

The flesh of vipers _being eaten, clear the sight, help the vices of
the nerves, resist poison exceedingly, neither is there any better
remedy under the sun for their bitings than the head of the viper that
bit you, bruised and applied to the place, and the flesh eaten, you
need not eat above a dram at a time, and make it up as you shall be
taught in troches of vipers. Neither any comparable to the stinging of
bees and wasps, &c. than the same that sting you, bruised and applied
to the place._

Land Scorpions _cure their own stingings by the same means; the ashes
of them (being burnt) potently provokes urine, and breaks the stone_.

Earth-worms, _are an admirable remedy for cut nerves being applied to
the place; they provoke urine; see the oil of them, only let me not
forget one notable thing quoted by _Mizaldus_, which is, That the
powder of them put into an hollow tooth, makes it drop out_.

To draw a tooth without pain, _fill an earthen crucible full of Emmets,
Ants, or Pismires, eggs and all, and when you have burned them, keep
the ashes, with which if you touch a tooth it will fall out_.

Eels, _being put into wine or beer, and suffered to die in it, he that
drinks it will never endure that sort of liquor again_.

Oysters _applied alive to a pestilential swelling, draw the venom to
them_.

Crab-fish, _burnt to ashes, and a dram of it taken every morning helps
the bitings of mad dogs, and all other venomous beasts_.

Swallows, _being eaten, clear the sight, the ashes of them (being
burnt) eaten, preserve from drunkenness, helps sore throats being
applied to them, and inflammations_.

Grass-hoppers, _being eaten, ease the cholic, and pains in the bladder_.

Hedge Sparrows, _being kept in salt, or dried and eaten raw, are an
admirable remedy for the stone_.

Young Pigeons _being eaten, help pains in the reins, and the disease
called Tenesmus_.


    PARTS OF LIVING CREATURES,
    AND EXCREMENTS.

THE brain of _Sparrows_ being eaten, provokes lust exceedingly.

The brain of an _Hare_ being roasted, helps trembling, it makes
children breed teeth easily, their gums being rubbed with it, it also
helps scald heads, and falling off of hair, the head being anointed
with it.

The head of a young _Kite_, being burnt to ashes and the quantity of
a drachm of it taken every morning in a little water, is an admirable
remedy against the gout.

_Crab-eyes_ break the stone, and open stoppings of the bowels.

The lungs of a _Fox_, well dried, (but not burned) is an admirable
strengthener to the lungs: see the Lohoch of Fox lungs.

The liver of a _Duck_, stops fluxes, and strengthens the liver
exceedingly.

The liver of a _Frog_, being dried and eaten, helps quartan agues, or
as the vulgar call them, _third-day agues_.

_Castoreum_ resists poison, the bitings of venomous beasts; it provokes
the menses, and brings forth birth and after-birth; it expels wind,
eases pains and aches, convulsions, sighings, lethargies; the smell of
it allays the fits of the mother; inwardly given, it helps tremblings,
falling-sickness, and other such ill effects of the brain and nerves: A
scruple is enough to take at a time, and indeed spirit of Castorium is
better than Castorium, raw, to which I refer you.

A _Sheep’s_ or _Goat’s_ bladder being burnt, and the ashes given
inwardly, helps the _Diabetes_.

A flayed _Mouse_ dried and beaten into powder, and given at a time,
helps such as cannot hold their water, or have a _Diabetes_, if you do
the like three days together.

_Ivory_, or _Elephant’s tooth_, binds, stops the _Whites_, it
strengthens the heart and stomach, helps the yellow jaundice, and makes
women fruitful.

Those small bones which are found in the fore-feet of an _Hare_, being
beaten into powder and drank in wine, powerfully provoke urine.

_Goose grease, and Capons grease_, are both softening, help gnawing
sores, stiffness of the womb, and mitigate pain.

I am of opinion that the suet of a _Goat_ mixed with a little saffron,
is as excellent an ointment for the gout, especially the gout in the
knees, as any is.

_Bears grease_ stays the falling off of the hair.

_Fox grease_ helps pains in the ears.

_Elk’s Claws or hoofs_ are a sovereign remedy for the falling sickness,
though it be but worn in a ring, much more being taken inwardly; but
saith _Mizaldus_, it must be the hoof of the right foot behind.

_Milk_ is an extreme windy meat; therefore I am of the opinion of
_Dioscorides_, _viz._ that it is not profitable in head-aches; yet
this is for certain, that it is an admirable remedy for inward ulcers
in any part of the body, or any corrosions, or excoriations, pains in
the reins and bladder: but it is very bad in diseases of the liver,
spleen, the falling-sickness, vertigo, or dissiness in the head, fevers
and head-aches; Goat’s milk is held to be better than Cow’s for Hectic
fevers, phthisick, and consumptions, and so is Ass’s also.

_Whey_, attenuates and cleanses both choler and melancholy:
wonderfully helps melancholy and madness coming of it; opens stoppings
of the bowels; helps such as have the dropsy and are troubled with the
stoppings of the spleen, rickets and hypochondriac melancholy: for such
diseases you may make up your physic with whey. Outwardly it cleanses
the skin of such deformities as come through choler or melancholy, as
scabs, itch, morphew, leprosies, &c.

_Honey_ is of a gallant cleansing quality, exceeding profitable in all
inward ulcers in what part of the body soever; it opens the veins,
cleanses the reins and bladder. I know no vices belonging to it, but
only it is soon converted into choler.

_Wax_, softens, heats, and meanly fills sores with flesh, it suffers
not the milk to curdle in women’s breasts; inwardly it is given (ten
grains at a time) against bloody-fluxes.

_Raw-silk_, heats and dries, cheers the heart, drives away sadness,
comforts all the spirits, both natural, vital and animal.


    BELONGING TO THE SEA.

_Sperma Cœti_, is well applied outwardly to eating ulcers, the marks
which the small pox leaves behind them; it clears the sight, provokes
sweat; inwardly it troubles the stomach and belly, helps bruises,
and stretching of the nerves, and therefore is good for women newly
delivered.

_Amber-grease_, heats and dries, strengthens the brain and nerves
exceedingly, if the infirmity of them come of cold, resists pestilence.

_Sea-sand_, a man that hath the dropsy, being set up to the middle in
it, it draws out all the water.

_Red Coral_, is cold, dry and binding, stops the immoderate flowing of
the menses, bloody-fluxes, the running of the reins, and the Fluor
Albus, helps such as spit blood, it is an approved remedy for the
falling sickness. Also if ten grains of red Coral be given to a child
in a little breast-milk so soon as it is born, before it take any other
food, it will never have the falling-sickness, nor convulsions. The
common dose is from ten grains to thirty.

_Pearls_, are a wonderful strengthener to the heart, encrease milk
in nurses, and amend it being naught, they restore such as are in
consumptions; both they and the red Coral preserve the body in health,
and resist fevers. The dose is ten grains or fewer; more, I suppose,
because it is dear, than because it would do harm.

_Amber_, (_viz._ yellow Amber) heats and dries, therefore prevails
against moist diseases of the head; it helps violent coughs, helps
consumption of the lungs, spitting of blood, the Fluor Albus; it stops
bleeding at the nose, helps difficulty of urine: You may take ten or
twenty grains at a time.

The Froth of the _Sea_, it is hot and dry, helps scabs, itch, and
leprosy, scald heads, &c. it cleanses the skin, helps difficulty of
urine, makes the teeth white, being rubbed with it, the head being
washed with it, it helps baldness, and trimly decks the head with hair.


    METALS, MINERALS, AND
    STONES.

GOLD is temperate in quality, it wonderfully strengthens the heart and
vital spirits, which one perceiving, very wittily inserted these verses:

    For Gold is cordial; and that’s the reason,
    Your raking Misers live so long a season.

However, this is certain, in cordials, it resists melancholy,
faintings, swoonings, fevers, falling-sickness, and all such like
infirmities, incident either to the vital or animal spirit.

_Alum._ Heats, binds, and purges; scours filthy ulcers, and fastens
loose teeth.

_Brimstone_, or flower of brimstone, which is brimstone refined, and
the better for physical uses; helps coughs and rotten flegm; outwardly
in ointments it takes away leprosies, scabs, and itch; inwardly it
helps yellow jaundice, as also worms in the belly, especially being
mixed with a little Salt-petre: it helps lethargies being snuffed up in
the nose.

_Litharge_, both of gold and silver; binds and dries much, fills up
ulcers with flesh, and heals them.

_Lead_ is of a cold dry earthly quality, of an healing nature; applied
to the place it helps any inflammation, and dries up humours.

_Pompholix_, cools, dries and binds.

_Jacynth_, strengthens the heart being either beaten into powder, and
taken inwardly, or only worn in a ring.

_Sapphire_, quickens the senses, helps such as are bitten by venomous
beasts, ulcers in the bowels.

_Emerald_; called a chaste stone because it resists lust: being worn
in a ring, it helps, or at least mitigates the falling sickness and
vertigo; it strengthens the memory, and stops the unruly passions of
men.

_Ruby_ (or _carbuncle_, if there be such a stone) restrains lust;
resists pestilence; takes away idle and foolish thoughts, makes men
cheerful. _Cardanus._

_Granite._ Strengthens the heart, but hurts the brain, causes anger,
takes away sleep.

_Diamond_, is reported to make him that bears it unfortunate.

_Amethist_, being worn, makes men sober and steady, keeps men from
drunkenness and too much sleep, it quickens the wit, is profitable in
huntings and fightings, and repels vapours from the head.

_Bezoar_, is a notable restorer of nature, a great cordial, no way
hurtful nor dangerous, is admirably good in fevers, pestilences, and
consumptions, _viz._ taken inwardly; for this stone is not used to be
worn as a jewel; the powder of it put upon wounds made by venomous
beasts, draws out the poison.

_Topaz_ (if _Epiphanius_ spake truth) if you put it into boiling
water, it doth so cool it that you may presently put your hands into
it without harm; if so, then it cools inflammations of the body by
touching them.

_Toadstone_; Being applied to the place helps the bitings of venomous
beasts, and quickly draws all the poison to it; it is known to be a
true one by this; hold it near to any toad, and she will make proffer
to take it away from you if it be right; else not. _Lemnius._

_Nephritichus lapis_; helps pains in the stomach, and is of great force
in breaking and bringing away the stone and gravel.

_Jasper_; being worn, stops bleeding, eases the labour in women, stops
lust, resists fevers and dropsies. _Mathiolus._

_Atites_, or the stone with child, because being hollow in the middle,
it contains another little stone within it, is found in an Eagle’s
nest, and in many other places; this stone being bound to the left arm
of women with child, stays their miscarriage or abortion, but when
the time of their labour comes, remove it from their arm, and bind it
to the inside of their thigh, and it brings forth the child, and that
(almost) without any pain at all. _Dioscorides, Pliny._

_Lapis Lazuli_, purges melancholy being taken inwardly; outwardly worn
as a jewel, it makes men cheerful, fortunate and rich.

And thus I end the stones, the virtues of which if any think
incredible, I answer; 1. I quoted the authors where I had them. 2. I
know nothing to the contrary but why it may be as possible as the sound
of a trumpet is to incite a man to valour; or a fiddle to dancing: and
if I have added a few simples which the Colledge left out, I hope my
fault is not much, or at a leastwise, venial.




    A CATALOGUE OF SIMPLES

    IN THE

    NEW DISPENSATORY.


    ROOTS.

College.] _Sorrel, Calamus Aromaticus, Water-flag, Privet, Garlick,
Marsh-mallows, Alcanet, Angelica, Anthora, Smallage, Aron, Birth-wort
long and round, Sowbread, Reeds, Asarabacca, Virginian Snakeweed,
Swall-wort, Asparagus, Asphodel, male and female. Burdocks great and
small, Behen, or Bazil, Valerian, white and red. Daisies, Beets,
white, red, and black. _Marsh-mallows_, Bistort, Barrage, Briony,
white and black, Bugloss, garden and wild. _Calamus Aromaticus_,
Our Lady’s thistles, Avens, Coleworts, Centaury the less. Onions,
Chameleon, white and black. Celandine, Pilewort, China, Succory,
Artichokes. _Virginian Snakeroot_, Comfry greater and lesser.
Contra yerva, Costus, sweet and bitter. Turmerick, wild Cucumbers,
Sowbread, Hound’s-tongue, Cypres, long and round. Toothwort, white
Dittany, Doronicum, Dragons, Woody Nightshade, Vipers Bugloss,
_Smallage_, Hellebore, white and black, Endive, Elicampane,
Eringo, Colt’s-foot, Fearn, male and female, Filipendula or Drop-wort,
Fennel, _white Dittany_, Galanga, great and small, Gentian,
Liquorice, Dog-grass, Hermodactils. _Swallow wort_, Jacinth,
Henbane, Jallap, Master-wort, Orris or Flower-de-luce, both English
and Florentine, sharp pointed Dock, Burdock greater and lesser,
Lovage, Privet, white Lilies, Liquorice, Mallows, Mechoacan, Jallap,
Spignel, Mercury, Devil’s bit, sweet Navew, Spikenard, Celtic and
Indian, Water lilies, Rest-harrow, sharp pointed Dock, Peony, male and
female. Parsnips, garden and wild, Cinquefoil, Butter-Bur, Parsley,
Hog’s Fennel, Valerian, greater and lesser, Burnet, Land and Water
Plantain, Polypodium of the Oak, Solomon’s Seal, Leeks, Pellitory of
Spain, Cinquefoil, Turnips, Raddishes, garden and wild, Rhapontick,
common Rhubarb, Monk’s Rhubarb, Rose Root, Madder Bruscus. Sopewort,
Sarsaparilla, Satyrion, male and female, White Saxifrage, Squills,
Figwort, Scorzonera, English and Spanish, Virginian Snake weed,
Solomon’s Seal, Cicers, stinking Gladon, Devil’s bit, Dandelion,
Thapsus, Tormentil, Turbith, Colt’s-foot, Valerian, greater and lesser,
Vervain, Swallow-wort, Nettles, Zedoary long and round, Ginger._

_Culpeper._] These be the roots the college hath named, and but only
named, and in this order I have set them down. It seems the college
holds a strange opinion, viz. That it would do an Englishman a mischief
to know what the herbs in his garden are good for.

But my opinion is, that those herbs, roots, plants, &c. which grow
near a man, are far better and more congruous to his nature than any
outlandish rubbish whatsoever, and this I am able to give a reason
of to any that shall demand it of me, therefore I am so copious in
handling of them, you shall observe them ranked in this order.

1. The temperature of the roots, herbs, flowers, &c. _viz._ Hot, cold,
dry, moist, together with the degree of each quality.

2. What part of the body each root, herb, flower, is appropriated to,
_viz._ head, throat, breast, heart, stomach, liver, spleen, bowels,
reins, bladder, womb, joints, and in those which heat those places, and
which cool them.

3. The property of each simple, as they bind, open, mollify, harden,
extenuate, discuss, draw out, suppure, cleanse, glutinate, break wind,
breed seed, provoke or stop the menses, resist poison, abate swellings,
ease pain.

This I intend shall be my general method throughout the simples,
which, having finished I shall give you a paraphrase explaining these
terms, which rightly considered, will be the key of _Galen’s_ way of
administering physic.

    _Temperature of the Roots._

_Roots hot in the first degree._ Marsh-mallows, Bazil, Valerian,
Spattling, Poppy, Burdocks, Borrage, Bugloss, Calamus Aromaticus,
Avens, Pilewort, China, Self-heal, Liquorice, Dog-grass, white Lilies,
Peony, male and female, wild Parsnips, Parsley, Valerian, great and
small, Knee-holly, Satyrion, Scorzonera, Skirrets.

_Hot in the second degree._ Water-flag, Reeds, Swallow-wort, Asphodel,
male, Carline Thistle, Cypress, long and round, Fennel, Lovage,
Spignel, Mercury, Devil’s bit, Butter Bur, Hog’s Fennel, Sarsaparilla,
Squils, Zedoary.

_Hot in the third degree._ Angelica, Aron, Birthwort long and round,
Sowbread, Asarabacca, Briony, white and black, Sallendine, Virgianian
snakeroot, Hemeric, White Dittany, Doronicum, Hellebore, white
and black, Elicampane, Fillipendula, Galanga greater and lesser,
Masterwort, Orris English and Florentine, Restharrow, stinking Gladen,
Turbith, Ginger.

_Hot in the fourth degree._ Garlick, Onions, Leeks, Pellitory of Spain.

_Roots temperate in respect of heat, are_ Bear’s breech, Sparagus, our
Lady’s Thistle, Eringo, Jallap, Mallows, Mechoacan, garden Parsnips,
Cinquefoil, Tormentil.

_Roots cold in the first degree._ Sorrel, Beets, white and red, Comfrey
the greater, Plantain, Rose Root, Madder.

_Cold in the second degree._ Alcanet, Daisies, Succory, Hound’s tongue,
Endive, Jacinth.

_Cold in the third degree._ Bistort and Mandrakes are cold in the third
degree, and Henbane in the fourth.

_Roots dry in the first degree._ Bears-breech, Burdocks, Redbeets,
Calamus Aromaticus, Pilewort, Self-heal, Endive, Eringo, Jacinth,
Madder, Kneeholly.

_Dry in the second degree._ Waterflag, Marshmallows, Alkanet, Smallage,
Reeds, Sorrel, Swallow-wort, Asphodel male, Bazil, Valerian and
Spatling Poppy, according to the opinion of the Greeks. Our Lady’s
Thistles, Avens, Succory, Hound’s tongue, Cypress long and round,
Fennel, Lovage, Spignel, Mercury, Devil’s bit, Butter-bur, Parsley,
Plantain, Zedoary.

_Dry in the third degree._ Angelica, Aron, Birthwort, long and round,
Sowbread, Bistort, Asarabacca, Briony white and black, Carline Thistle,
China, Sallendine, Virginian Snake-root, white Dittany, Doronicum,
Hellebore white and black, Elicampane, Fillipendula, Galanga greater
and lesser, Masterwort, Orris, English and Florentine, Restharrow,
Peony male and female, Cinquefoil, Hog’s Fennel, Sarsaparilla, stinking
Gladen, Tormentil, Ginger.

_Dry in the fourth degree._ Garlick, Onions, Costus, Leeks, Pellitory
of Spain.

_Roots moist are_, Bazil, Valerian, and Spatling-poppy, according
to the Arabian Physicians, Daisies, white Beets, Borrage, Bugloss,
Liquorice, Dog grass, Mallows, Satyrion, Scorzonera, Parsnips,
Skirrets.

    _Roots appropriated to several parts of the body._

_Heat the head._ Doronicum, Fennel, Jallap, Mechoacan, Spikenard,
Celtic and Indian. Peony male and female.

_Neck and throat._ Pilewort, Devil’s bit.

_Breast and lungs._ Birthwort long and round, Elicampane, Liquorice,
Orris English and Florentine, Calamus Aromaticus, Cinquefoil, Squills.

_Heart._ Angelica, Borrage, Bugloss, Carline Thistle, Doronicum, Butter
bur, Scorzonera, Tormentil, Zedoary, Bazil, Valerian white and red.

_Stomach._ Elicampane, Galanga greater and lesser, Spikenard, Celtic
and Indian, Ginger, Fennel, Avens, Raddishes.

_Bowels._ Valerian great and small, Zedoary, Ginger.

_Liver._ Smallage, Carline Thistle, Sullendine, China, Turmerick,
Fennel, Gentian, Dog-grass, Cinquefoil, Parsley, Smallage, Asparagus,
Rhubarb, Rhapontic, Kneeholly.

_Spleen._ Smallage, Carline Thistle, Fern male and female, Parsley,
Water-flag, Asparagus, round Birthwort, Fennel, Capers, Ash, Gentian.

_Reins and Bladder._ Marshmallows, Smallage, Asparagus, Burdock, Bazil,
Valerian, Spatling Poppy, Carline Thistle, China, Cyprus long and
round, Fillipendula, Dog grass, Spikenard, Celtic and Indian, Parsly,
Knee-holly, white Saxifrage.

_Womb._ Birthwort long and round, Galanga greater and lesser, Peony
male and female, Hog’s Fennel.

_Fundament._ Pilewort.

_Joints._ Bear’s-breech, Hermodactils, Jallap, Mecoacan, Ginger, Costus.

_Roots cool the head._ Rose root.

_Stomach._ Sow Thistles, Endive, Succory, Bistort.

_Liver._ Madder, Endive, Chicory.

    _Properties of the Roots._

Although I confess the properties of the simples may be found out by
the ensuing explanation of the terms, and I suppose by that means they
were found out at first; and although I hate a lazy student from my
heart, yet to encourage young students in the art, I shall quote the
chief of them: I desire all lovers of physic to compare them with the
explanation of these rules, so shall they see how they agree, so may
they be enabled to find out the properties of all simples to their own
benefit in physic.

_Roots, bind._ Cypress, Bistort, Tormentil, Cinquefoil, Bear’s breech,
Water-flag, Alkanet, Toothwort, &c.

_Discuss._ Birthwort, Asphodel, Briony, Capers, &c.

_Cleanse._ Birthwort, Aron, Sparagus, Grass, Asphodel, Celandine, &c.

_Open._ Asarabacca, Garlic, Leeks, Onions, Rhapontick, Turmerick,
Carline Thistle, Succory, Endive, Fillipendula, Fennel, Parsly,
Bruscus, Sparagus, Smallage, Gentian, &c.

_Extenuate._ Orris English and Florentine, Capers, &c.

_Burn._ Garlick, Onions, Pellitory of Spain, &c.

_Mollify._ Mallows, Marshmallows, &c.

_Suppur._ Marshmallows, Briony, white Lillies, &c.

_Glutinate._ Comfrey, Solomon’s Seal, Gentian, Birthwort, Daisies, &c.

_Expel Wind._ Smallage, Parsly, Fennel, Water-flag, Garlick, Costus,
Galanga, Hog’s Fennel, Zedoary, Spikenard Indian, and Celtic, &c.

_Breed Seed._ Waterflag, Eringo, Satyrian, Galanga, &c.

_Provoke the menses._ Birthwort, Asarabacca, Aron, Waterflag, white
Dittany, Asphodel, Garlick, Centaury the less, Cyperus long and
round, Costus, Capers, Calamus Aromaticus, Dittany of Crete, Carrots,
Eringo, Fennel, Parsly, Smallage, Grass, Elicampane, Peony, Valerian,
Knee-holly, &c.

_Stop the menses._ Comfrey, Tormentil, Bistort, &c.

_Provoke sweat._ Carolina Thistle, China, Sarsaparilla, &c.

_Resist poison._ Angelica, Garlick, long Birthwort, Smallage,
Doronicum, Costus, Zedoary, Cyprus, Gentian, Carolina Thistle, Bistort,
Tormentil, Swallow-wort, Viper’s Bugloss, Elicampane, &c.

_Help burnings._ Asphodel, Jacinth, white Lilies, &c.

_Ease pains._ Waterflag, Eringo, Orris, Restharrow, &c.

_Purge choler._ Asarabacca, Rhubarb, Rhapontick, Fern, &c.

_Relieve melancholy._ Hellebore, white and black, Polipodium.

_Purge flegm and watery humours._ Squills, Turbith, Hermodactils,
Jallap, Mecoacan, wild Cucumbers, Sowbread, male Asphodel, Briony white
and black, Elder, Spurge great and small.

I quoted some of these properties to teach you the way how to find
the rest, which the explanation of these terms will give you ample
instructions in: I quoted not all because I would fain have you
studious: be diligent gentle reader.

How to use your bodies in, and after taking purges, you shall be taught
by and by.

    _Barks mentioned by the College are these._

College.] _Hazel Nuts, Oranges, Barberries, Birch-tree, Caper roots,
Cassia Lignea, Chestnuts, Cinnamon, Citron Pills, Dwarf-Elder, Spurge
roots, Alder, Ash, Pomegranates, Guajacum, Walnut tree, green Walnuts,
Laurel, Bay, Lemon, Mace, Pomegranates, Mandrake roots, Mezereon,
Mulberry tree roots, Sloe tree roots, Pinenuts, Fistick-nuts, Poplar
tree, Oak, Elder, Sassafras, Cork, Tamerisk, Lime tree, Frankincense,
Elm, Capt. Winter’s Cinnamon._

_Culpeper._] Of these, Captain Winter’s Cinnamon, being taken as
ordinary spice, or half a dram taken in the morning in any convenient
liquor, is an excellent remedy for the scurvy; the powder of it being
snuffed up in the nose, cleanses the head of rheum gallantly.

The bark of the black Alder tree purges choler and flegm if you make a
decoction with it. Agrimony, Wormwood, Dodder, Hops, Endive and Succory
roots: Parsly and Smallage roots, or you may bruise a handful of each
of them, and put them in a gallon of ale, and let them work together:
put the simples into a boulter-bag, and a draught, (half a pint, more
or less, according to the age of him that drinks it,) being drunk every
morning, helps the dropsy, jaundice, evil disposition of the body;
also helps the rickets, strengthens the liver and spleen; makes the
digestion good, troubles not the stomach at all, causes appetite, and
helps such as are scabby and itchy.

The rest of the barks that are worth the noting, and the virtues of
them, are to be found in the former part of the book.

_Barks are hot in the first degree._ Guajacum, Tamarisk, Oranges,
Lemons, Citrons.

_In the second._ Cinnamon, Cassia, Lignea, Captain Winter’s Cinnamon,
Frankincense, Capers.

_In the third._ Mace.

_Cold in the first._ Oak, Pomegranates.

_In the third._ Mandrakes.

    _Appropriated to parts of the body._

_Heat the head._ Captain Winter’s Cinnamon.

_The heart._ Cinnamon, Cassia, Lignea, Citron Pills, Walnuts, Lemon
pills, Mace.

_The stomach._ Orange pills, Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon, Citron pills,
Lemon pills, Mace, Sassafras.

_The lungs._ Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon, Walnuts.

_The liver._ Barberry-tree, Bay-tree, Captain Winter’s Cinnamon.

_The spleen._ Caper bark, Ash tree bark, Bay tree.

_The reins and bladder._ Bay-tree, Sassafras.

_The womb._ Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon.

_Cool the stomach._ Pomegranate pills.

_Purge choler._ The bark of Barberry tree.

_Purge flegm and water._ Elder, Dwarf-Elder, Spurge, Laurel.


    WOODS.

College.] _Firr, Wood of Aloes, Rhodium, Brazil, Box, Willow, Cypress,
Ebony, Guajacum, Juniper, Lentisk, Nephriticum, Rhodium, Rosemary,
Sanders, white, yellow, and red, Sassafras, Tamarisk._

_Of these some are hot._ Wood of Aloes, Rhodium, Box, Ebony, Guajacum,
Nephriticum, Rosemary, Sassafras, Tamarisk.

_Some cold._ As Cypress, Willow, Sanders white, red, and yellow.

Rosemary is appropriated to the head, wood of Aloes to the heart
and stomach, Rhodium to the bowels and bladder, Nephriticum to the
liver, spleen, reins and bladder, Sassafras to the breast, stomach and
bladder, Tamarisk to the spleen, Sanders cools the heart and spirits in
fevers.

For the particular virtues of each, see that part of the book preceding.


    HERBS.

College.] _Southernwood male and female. Wormwood, common, Roman, and
such as bear Wormseed, Sorrel, wood Sorrel, Maiden-hair common, white
or wall Rue, black and golden Maudlin, Agremony, Vervain, Mallow,
Ladies Mantle, Chickweed, Marshmallows, and Pimpernel both male and
female, Water Pimpernel, Dill, Angelica, Smallage, Goose-grass, or
Cleavers, Columbine, wild Tansie, or Silver Weed, Mugwort, Asarabacca,
Woodroofe, Arach, Distaff Thistle, Mousear, Costmary, or Alcost,
Burdock greater and lesser, Brooklime, or water Pimpernel, Beets
white, red, and black, Betony of the wood and water. Daisies greater
and lesser, Blite, Mercury, Borrage, Oak of Jerusalem, Cabbages,
Sodonella, Briony white and black, Bugloss, Buglesse, Shepherd’s
Purse, Ox-eye, Box leaves, Calaminth of the Mountains and Fens,
Ground Pine, Wood-bine, or Honey-suckles, Lady-smocks, Marygolds, Our
Lady’s Thistle, Carduus Benedictus, Avens, small Spurge, Horse-tail,
Coleworts, Centaury the less, Knotgrass, Cervil, Germander, Camomile,
Chamepytis female Southernwood, Chelene, Pilewort, Chicory, Hemlock,
garden and sea Scurvy-grass, Fleawort, Comfry great, middle, or bugle,
least or Daisies, Sarasens, Confound, Buck-horn, Plantain, May weed,
(or Margweed, as we in Sussex call it) Orpine, Sampeer, Crosewort,
Dodder, Blue Bottle great and small, Artichokes, Houndstone, Cypress
leaves, Dandelion, Dittany of Treet, Box leaves, Teazles garden and
wild, Dwarff Elder, Viper’s Bugloss, Lluellin, Smallage, Endive,
Elecampane, Horsetail, Epithimum, Groundsel, Hedge-mustard, Spurge,
Agrimony, Maudlin, Eye-bright, Orpine, Fennel, Sampeer, Fillipendula,
Indian leaf, Strawberry leaves, Ash tree leaves, Fumitory, Goat’s Rue,
Lady’s Bedstraw, Broom, Muscatu, Herb Robert, Doves Foot, Cottonweed,
Hedge Hyssop, Tree Ivy, Ground Ivy, or Alehoof, Elecampane, Pellitory
of the wall, Liver-wort, Cowslips, Rupture-wort, Hawkweed, Monk’s
Rhubarb, Alexanders, Clary garden and wild, Henbane, St. John’s-wort,
Horsetongue, or double tongue, Hysop, Sciatica cresses, small Sengreen,
Sharewort, Woad, Reeds, Schænanth, Chamepitys, Glasswort, Lettice,
Lagobus, Arch-angel, Burdock great and small, Lavender, Laurel, Bay
leaves, English and Alexandrian, Duckweed, Dittander, or Pepper-wort,
Lovage, Privet, Sea bugloss, Toad flax, Harts-tongue, sweet Trefoil,
Wood-sorrel, Hops, Willow-herb, Marjoram, common and tree Mallows,
Mandrake, Hore-hound white and black, Herb Mastich, Featherfew,
Woodbine, Melilot, Bawm garden and water, Mints, Horse-mints,
Mercury, Mezereon, Yarrow, Devil’s-bit, Moss, sweet Chivil, Mirtle
leaves, Garden and water Cresses, Nep, Tobacco, Money-wort, Water
Lilies, Bazil, Olive Leaves, Rest-harrow, Adder’s Tongue, Origanum,
sharp-pointed Dock, Poppy, white, black, and red, or Erratick,
Pellitory of the Wall, Cinquefoil, Ars-smart spotted and not spotted,
Peach Leaves, Thoroughwax, Parsley, Hart’s Tongue, Valeriak, Mouse-ear,
Burnet, small Spurge, Plantain common and narrow leaved, Mountain and
Cretick Poley, Knotgrass, Golden Maidenhair, Poplar leaves and buds,
Leeks, Purslain, Silverweed, or wild Tansy, Horehound white and black,
Primroses, Self-heal, Field Pellitory, or Sneezewort, Pennyroyal,
Fleabane, Lungwort, Winter-green, Oak leaves and buds, Docks, common
rue, Wall Rue or white Maidenhair, wild Rue, Savin, Osier Leaves,
Garden Sage the greater and lesser, Wild Sage, Elder leaves and
buds, Marjorum, Burnet, Sanicle, Sopewort, Savory, White Saxifrage,
Scabious, Chicory, Schœnanth, Clary, Scordium, Figwort, Houseleek, or
Sengreen the greater and lesser, Groundsel, Senna leaves and pods,
Mother of Time, Solomon’s Seal, Alexanders, Nightshade, Soldanela,
Sow-thistles, smooth and rough, Flixweed, common Spike, Spinach,
Hawthorn, Devil’s-bit, Comfry, Tamarisk leaves, Tansy, Dandelyon,
Mullen or Higcaper, Time, Lime tree leaves, Spurge, Tormentil, common
and golden Trefoil, Wood-sorrel, sweet Trefoil, Colt’s-foot, Valerian,
Mullen, Vervain, Paul’s Bettony, Lluellin, Violets, Tansy, Perewinkles,
Swallow-wort, golden Rod, Vine leaves, Meadsweet, Elm leaves,
Naval-wort, Nettles, common and Roman, Archangel, or dead Nettles,
white and red._

_Culpeper._ These be the herbs as the college set down to look upon, we
will see if we can translate them in another form to the benefit of the
body of man.

_Herbs temperate in respect of heat, are_ common Maiden-hair,
Wall-rue, black and golden Maiden-hair, Woodroof, Bugle, Goat’s Rue,
Hart’s-tongue, sweet Trefoil, Flixweed, Cinquefoil, Trefoil, Paul’s
Bettony, Lluellin.

_Intemperate and hot in the first degree, are_ Agrimony, Marsh-mallows,
Goose-grass or Cleavers, Distaff Thistle, Borrage, Bugloss, or Lady’s
Thistles, Avens, Cetrach, Chervil, Chamomel, Eyebright, Cowslips,
Melilot, Bazil, Self-heal.

_In the second._ Common and Roman Wormwood, Maudlin, Lady’s Mantle,
Pimpernel male and female, Dill, Smallage, Mugwort, Costmary, Betony,
Oak of Jerusalem, Marigold, Cuckooflowers, Carduus Benedictus, Centaury
the less, Chamepitys, Scurvy-grass, Indian Leaf, Broom, Ale-hoof,
Alexanders, Double-tongue, or Tongue-blade, Archangel, or dead Nettles,
Bay Leaves, Marjoram, Horehound, Bawm, Mercury, Devil’s-bit, Tobacco,
Parsley, Poley mountain, Rosemary, Sage, Sanicle Scabious, Senna,
Soldanella, Tansy, Vervain, Perewinkle.

_In the third degree._ Southernwood male and female, Brooklime,
Angelica, Briony white and black, Calaminth, Germander, Sullendine,
Pilewort, Fleabane, Dwarf Elder, Epithimun, Bank-cresses, Clary,
Glasswort, Lavender, Lovage, Herb Mastich, Featherfew, Mints,
Water-cresses, Origanum, biting Arsmart, called in Latin Hydropiper,
(the college confounds this with _Persicaria_, or mild Arsmart, which
is cold) Sneezewort, Pennyroyal, Rue, Savin, summer and winter Savory,
Mother of Time, Lavender, Spike, Time, Nettles.

_In the fourth degree._ Sciatica-cresses, Stone-crop, Dittany, or
Pepper-wort, garden-cresses, Leeks, Crowfoot, Rosa Solis, Spurge.

_Herbs cold in the first degree._ Sorrel, Wood-sorrel, Arach, Burdock,
Shepherd’s-purse, Pellitory of the wall, Hawk-weed, Mallows, Yarrow,
mild Arsmart, called _Persicaria_, Burnet, Coltsfoot, Violets.

_Cold in the second degree._ Chickweed, wild Tansy, or Silverweed,
Daisies, Knotgrass, Succory, Buck-horn, Plantain, Dandelyon, Endive,
Fumitory, Strawberry leaves, Lettice, Duck-meat, Plantain, Purslain,
Willow leaves.

_In the third degree._ Sengreen, or House-leek, Nightshade.

_In the fourth degree._ Hemlock, Henbane, Mandrakes, Poppies.

_Herbs dry in the first degree._ Agrimony, Marsh-mallows, Cleavers,
Burdocks, Shepherds-purse, our Lady’s Thistle, Chervil, Chamomel,
Eye-bright, Cowslips, Hawkweed, Tongue-blade, or double tongue,
Melilot, mild Arsmart, Self-heal, Senna, Flixweed, Coltsfoot,
Perewinkle.

_Dry in the second degree._ Common and Roman Wormwood, Sorrel,
Wood-sorrel, Maudlin, Lady’s mantle, Pimpernel male and female,
Dill, Smallage, wild Tansy, or Silverweed, Mugwort, Distaff Thistle,
Costmary, Betony, Bugle, Cuckooflowers, Carduus Benedictus, Avens,
Centaury the less, Chicory, commonly called Succory, Scurvy-grass,
Buckhorn, Plantain, Dandelyon, Endive, Indian Leaf, Strawberry leaves,
Fumitory, Broom, Alehoof, Alexanders, Archangel, or Dead Nettles, white
and red, Bay Leaves, Marjoram, Featherfew, Bawm, Mercury, Devil’s-bit,
Tobacco, Parsley, Burnet, Plantain, Rosemary, Willow Leaves, Sage,
Santicle, Scabious, Soldanella, Vervain.

_Dry in the third degree._ Southernwood, male and female, Brooklime,
Angelica, Briony, white and black, Calamint, Germander, Chamepitys,
Selandine, Pilewort, Fleabane, Epithinum, Dwarf-Elder, Bank cresses,
Clary, Glasswort, Lavender, Lovage, Horehound, Herb Mastic, Mints,
Watercresses, Origanum, Cinquefoil, hot Arsmart, Poley mountain,
Sneezewort, Penny-royal, Rue, or herb of Grace, Savin, winter and
summer Savory, Mother of Time, Lavender, Silk, Tansy, Time, Trefoil.

_In the fourth degree._ Garden-cresses, wild Rue, Leeks, Onions,
Crowfoot, Rosa Solis, Garlic, Spurge.

_Herbs moist in the first degree._ Borrage, Bugloss, Marigolds,
Pellitory of the wall, Mallows, Bazil.

_In the fourth degree._ Chickweed, Arach, Daisies, Lettice, Duckmeat,
Purslain, Sow Thistles, Violets, Water-lilies.

    _Herbs appropriated to certain parts of the body
    of man._

_Heat the head._ Maudlin, Costmary, Betony, Carduus Benedictus,
Sullendine, Scurvy-grass, Eye-bright, Goat’s Rue, Cowslips, Lavender,
Laurel, Lovage, herb Mastich, Feather-few, Melilot, Sneezewort,
Penny-royal, Senna, Mother of Time, Vervain, Rosemary.

_Heat the throat._ Archangel white and red, otherwise called dead
Nettles, Devil’s-bit.

_Heat the breast._ Maiden-hair, white, black, common and golden,
Distaff Thistle, Time, Betony, Calaminth, Chamomel, Fennel,
Indian-leaf, Bay leaves, Hyssop, Bawm, Horehound, Oak of Jerusalem,
Germander, Melilot, Origanum, Rue, Scabious, Periwinkles, Nettles.

_Heat the heart._ Southernwood male and female, Angelica, Wood-roof,
Bugloss, Carduus Benedictus, Borrage, Goat’s Rue, Senna, Bazil,
Rosemary, Elecampane.

_Heat the stomach._ Wormwood common and Roman, Smallage, Avens, Indian
leaf, Broom, Schenanth, Bay leaves, Bawm, Mints, Parsley, Fennel, Time,
Mother of Time, Sage.

_Heat the liver._ Agrimony, Maudlin, Pimpernel, male and female,
Smallage, Costmary, or Ale cost, our Lady’s Thistles, Centaury the
less, Germander, Chamepytis, Selandine, Sampier, Fox Gloves, Ash-tree
leaves, Bay leaves, Toad-flax, Hops, Horehound, Water-cresses, Parsley,
Poley Mountain, Sage, Scordium, Senna, Mother of Time, Soldanella,
Asarabacca, Fennel, Hyssop, Spikenard.

_Heat the bowels._ Chamomel, Alehoofe, Alexanders.

_Heat the spleen._ All the four sorts of Maiden-hair, Agrimony,
Smallage, Centaury the less, Cetrach, Germander, Chamepitys, Samphire,
Fox-glove, Epithimum, Ash-tree, Bay leaves, Toad-flax, Hops, Horehound,
Parsley, Poley, Mountain Sage, Scordium, Senna, Mother of Time,
Tamarisk, Wormwood, Water-cresses, Hart’s-tongue.

_Heat the reins and bladder._ Agrimony, Maudlin, Marsh-mallows,
Pimpernel male and female, Brooklime, Costmary, Bettony, Chervil,
Germander, Chamomel, Samphire, Broom, Rupture-wort, Clary, Schenanth,
Bay-leaves, Toad-flax, Hops, Melilot, Water-cresses, Origanum,
Pennyroyal, Scordium, Vervain, Mother of Time, Rocket, Spikenard,
Saxifrage, Nettles.

_Heat the womb._ Maudlin, Angelica, Mugwort, Costmary, Calaminth,
Flea-bane, May-weed, Ormarg-weed, Dittany of Crete, Schenanth,
Arch-angel or Dead Nettles, Melilot, Feather-few, Mints, Devil’s-bit,
Origanum, Bazil, Pennyroyal, Savin, Sage, Scordium, Tansy, Time,
Vervain, Periwinkles, Nettles.

_Heat the joints._ Cowslips, Sciatica-cresses, hot Arsmart,
Garden-cresses, Costmary, Agrimony, Chamomel, Saint John’s-wort,
Melilot, Water-cresses, Rosemary, Rue, Sage, Stechas.

_Herbs cooling the head._ Wood-sorrel, Teazles, Lettice, Plantain,
Willow-leaves, Sengreen or Houseleek, Strawberry-leaves, Violet-leaves,
Fumitory, Water Lilies.

_Cool the throat._ Orpine, Strawberry leaves, Privet, Bramble leaves.

_Breast._ Mulberry leaves, Bramble leaves, Violet leaves, Strawberry
leaves, Sorrel, Wood-sorrel, Poppies, Orpine, Moneywort, Plantain,
Colt’s-foot.

_Heart._ Sorrel, Wood sorrel, Viper’s Bugloss, Lettice, Burnet, Violet
leaves, Strawberry leaves, and Water-Lilies.

_Stomach._ Sorrel, Wood sorrel, Succory, Orpine, Dandelyon, Endive,
Strawberry leaves, Hawkweed, Lettice, Purslain, Sow Thistles, Violet
leaves.

_Liver._ Sorrel, Woodsorrel, Dandelyon, Endive, Succory, Strawberry
leaves, Fumitory, Liverwort, Lettice, Purslain, Nightshade, Water
Lilies.

_Bowels._ Fumitory, Mallows, Buckthorn, Plantain, Orpine, Plantain,
Burnet.

_Spleen._ Fumitory, Endive, Succory, Lettice.

_Reins and bladder._ Knotgrass, Mallows, Yarrow, Moneywort, Plantain,
Endive, Succory, Lettice, Purslain, Water Lilies, Houseleek or Sengreen.

_The womb._ Wild Tansy, Arrach, Burdocks, Willow herb, Mirtle leaves,
Moneywort, Purslain, Sow Thistles, Endive, Succory, Lettice, Water
Lilies, Sengreen.

_The joints._ Willow leaves, Vine leaves, Lettice, Henbane, Nightshade,
Sengreen or Houseleek.

    _Herbs altering according to property, in operation,
    some bind, as_

Amomus, Agnus Castus, Shepherd’s purse, Cypress, Horsetail, Ivy, Bay
leaves, Melilot, Bawm, Mirtles, Sorrel, Plantain, Knot-grass, Comfry,
Cinquefoil, Fleawort, Purslain, Oak leaves, Willow leaves, Sengreen or
Houseleek, &c.

_Open, as_, Garlick, Onions, Wormwood, Mallows, Marsh-mallows,
Pellitory of the Wall, Endive, Succory, &c.

_Soften._ Mallows, Marsh-mallows, Beets, Pellitory of the Wall,
Violet leaves, Strawberry leaves, Arrach, Cypress leaves, Bay leaves,
Fleawort, &c.

_Harden._ Purslain, Nightshade, Houseleek or Sengreen, Duckmeat, and
most other herbs that are very cold.

_Extenuate._ Mugwort, Chamomel, Hysop, Pennyroyal, Stœchas, Time,
Mother of Time, Juniper, &c.

_Discuss._ Southernwood male and female, all the four sorts of
Maidenhair, Marsh-mallows, Dill, Mallows, Arrach, Beets, Chamomel,
Mints, Melilot, Pelitory of the Wall, Chickweed, Rue, Stœchas, Marjoram.

_Draw._ Pimpernel, Birthwort, Dittany, Leeks, Onions, Garlick, and also
take this general rule, as all cold things bind and harden, so all
things very hot are drying.

_Suppure._ Mallows, Marsh-mallows, White Lily leaves, &c.

_Cleanse._ Pimpernel, Southernwood, Sparagus, Cetrach, Arrach,
Wormwood, Beet, Pellitory of the Wall, Chamepitis, Dodder, Liverwort,
Horehound, Willow leaves, &c.

_Glutinate._ Marsh-mallows, Pimpernel, Centaury, Chamepitis,
Mallows, Germander, Horsetail, Agrimony, Maudlin, Strawberry leaves,
Woad-chervil, Plantain, Cinquefoil, Comfry, Bugle, Self-heal,
Woundwort, Tormentil, Rupture-wort, Knot-grass, Tobacco.

_Expel wind._ Wormwood, Garlick, Dill, Smallage, Chamomel, Epithimum,
Fennel, Juniper, Marjoram, Origanum, Savory both winter and summer.
Tansy is good to cleanse the stomach and bowels of rough viscous flegm,
and humours that stick to them, which the flegmatic constitution of the
winter usually infects the body of man with, and occasions gouts and
other diseases of like nature and lasting long. This was the original
of that custom to eat Tansys in the spring; the herb may be made into
a conserve with sugar, or boil it in wine and drink the decoction, or
make the juice into a syrup with sugar, which you will.

_Herbs breed seed._ Clary, Rocket, and most herbs that are hot and
moist, and breed wind.

_Provoke the terms._ Southernwood, Garlick, all the sorts of Maiden
hair, Mugwort, Wormwood, Bishops-weed, Cabbages, Bettony, Centaury,
Chamomel, Calaminth, Germander, Dodder, Dittany, Fennel, St. John’s
Wort, Marjoram, Horehound, Bawm, Water-cresses, Origanum, Bazil,
Pennyroyal, Poley mountain, Parsley, Smallage, Rue, Rosemary, Sage,
Savin, Hartwort, Time, Mother of Time, Scordium, Nettles.

_Stop the terms._ Shepherd’s purse, Strawberries, Mirtles, Water
Lilies, Plantain, Houseleek or Sengreen, Comfry, Knotgrass.

_Resist poison._ Southernwood, Wormwood, Garlick, all sorts of Maiden
hair, Smallage, Bettony, Carduus Benedictus, Germander, Calaminth,
Alexanders, Carline Thistle, Agrimony, Fennel, Juniper, Horehound,
Origanum, Pennyroyal, Poley-mountain, Rue, Scordium, Plantain.

_Discuss swellings._ Maiden-hair, Cleavers, or Goosegrass, Mallows,
Marsh-mallows, Docks, Bawm, Water-cresses, Cinquefoil, Scordium, &c.

_Ease pain._ Dil, Wormwood, Arach, Chamomel, Calaminth, Chamepitis,
Henbane, Hops, Hog’s Fennel, Parsley, Rosemary, Rue, Marjoram, Mother
of Time.

    _Herbs Purging._

_Choler._ Groundsel, Hops, Peach leaves, Wormwood, Centaury, Mallows,
Senna.

_Melancholy._ Ox-eye, Epithimum, Fumitory, Senna, Dodder.

_Flegm and water._ Briony, white and black, Spurge, both work most
violently and are not fit for a vulgar use, Dwarf Elder, Hedge Hyssop,
Laurel leaves, Mercury, Mezereon also purges violently, and so doth
Sneezewort, Elder leaves, Senna.

For the particular operations of these, as also how to order the body
after purges, the quantity to be taken at a time, you have been in part
instructed already, and shall be more fully hereafter.


    FLOWERS.

College.] _Wormwood, Agnus Castus, Amaranthus, Dill, Rosemary,
Columbines, Orrenges, Balaustins, or Pomegranate Flowers, Bettony,
Borrage, Bugloss, Marigolds, Woodbine or Honeysuckles, Clove
Gilliflowers, Centaury the less, Chamomel, Winter Gilliflowers,
Succory, Comfry the greater, Saffron, Blue-bottle great and small,
(_Synosbatus_, _Tragus_, and _Dedonæus_ hold our white
thorn to be it, _Cordus_ and _Marcelus_ think it to be
Bryars, _Lugdunensis_ takes it for the sweet Bryar, but what our
College takes it for, I know not) Cytinus, (_Dioscorides_ calls
the flowers of the Manured Pomegranates, Cytinus, but _Pliny_
calls the flowers of the wild kind by that name,) Fox-glove, Vipers
Bugloss, Rocket, Eye-bright, Beans, Fumitory, Broom, Cowslips, St.
John’s Wort, Hysop, Jessamine or Shrub, Trefoil, Archangel, or Dead
Nettles white and red, Lavender, Wall-flowers, or Winter-Gilliflowers,
Privet, Lilies white, and of the valley, Hops, Common and tree Mallows,
Feather-few, Woodbine, or Honeysuckles, Melilot, Bawm, Walnuts,
Water-Lilies white and yellow, Origanum, Poppies white and red, or
Erraticks, Poppies, or corn Roses, so called because they grow amongst
Corn, Peony, Honeysuckles, or Woodbine, Peach-flowers, Primroses,
Self-heal, Sloe bush, Rosemary flowers, Roses, white, damask and red,
Sage, Elder, white Saxifrage, Scabious, Siligo, (I think they mean
wheat by it, Authors are not agreed about it) Steches, Tamarisk, Tansy,
Mullen or Higtaper, Limetree, Clove Gilliflowers, Colt’s-foot, Violets,
Agnus Castus, Dead Nettles white and red._

_Culpeper._] That these may be a little explained for the public good:
be pleased to take notice.

_Some are hot in the first degree, as_ Borrage, Bugloss, Bettony,
Ox-eye, Melilot, Chamomel, Stœchas.

_Hot in the second degree._ Amomus, Saffron, Clove-gilliflowers,
Rocket, Bawm, Spikenard, Hops, Schenanth, Lavender, Jasmine, Rosemary.

_In the third degree._ Agnus Castus, Epithimum, Winter-gilliflowers,
or Wallflowers, Woodbine, or Honey-suckles.

_Cold in the first degree._ Mallows, Roses, red, white, and damask
Violets.

_In the second._ Anemom, or Wind-flower, Endive, Succory, Water-lilies,
both white and yellow.

_In the third._ Balaustins, or Pomegranate flowers.

_In the fourth._ Henbane, and all the sorts of Poppies, only whereas
authors say, field Poppies, which some call red, others erratick and
corn Roses, are the coldest of all the others; yet my opinion is, that
they are not cold in the fourth degree.

_Moist in the first degree._ Borrage, Bugloss, Mallows, Succory, Endive.

_In the second._ Water-lilies, Violets.

_Dry in the first degree._ Ox-eye, Saffron, Chamomel, Melilot, Roses.

_In the second._ Wind-flower, Amomus, Clove-gilliflowers, Rocket,
Lavender, Hops, Peony, Rosemary, Spikenard.

_In the third._ Woodbine, or Honey-suckles, Balaustines, Epithimum,
Germander, Chamepitis.

The temperature of any other flowers not here mentioned are of the same
temperature with the herbs, you may gain skill by searching there for
them, you can loose none.

    _For the parts of the body, they are appropriated
    to, some heat_

_The head_; _as_, Rosemary flowers, Self-heal, Chamomel, Bettony,
Cowslips, Lavender, Melilot, Peony, Sage, Stœchas.

_The breast._ Bettony, Bawm, Scabious, Schœnanth.

_The heart._ Bawm, Rosemary flowers, Borrage, Bugloss, Saffron,
Spikenard.

_The stomach._ Rosemary-flowers, Spikenard, Schœnanth.

_The liver._ Centaury, Schænanth, Elder, Bettony, Chamomel, Spikenard.

_The spleen._ Bettony, Wall-flowers.

_The reins and bladder._ Bettony, Marsh-mallows, Melilot, Schœnanth,
Spikenard.

_The womb._ Bettony, Squinanth or Schenanth, Sage, Orris or
Flower-de-luce.

_The joints._ Rosemary-flowers, Cowslips, Chamomel, Melilot.

    _Flowers, as they are cooling, so they cool_

_The head._ Violets, Roses, the three sorts of Poppies, and
Water-lilies.

_The breast and heart._ Violets, Red Roses, Water-lilies.

_The stomach._ Red Roses, Violets.

_The liver and spleen._ Endive, and Succory.

Violets, Borrage, and Bugloss, moisten the heart, Rosemary-flowers,
Bawm and Bettony, dry it.

    _According to property, so they bind._

Balaustins, Saffron, Succory, Endive, red-roses, Melilot, Bawm,
Clove-gilliflowers, Agnus Castus.

_Discuss._ Dill, Chamomel, Marsh-mallows, Mallows, Melilot, Stœchas, &c.

_Cleanse._ Damask-roses, Elder flowers, Bean flowers, &c.

_Extenuate._ Orris, or Flower-de-luce, Chamomel, Melilot, Stœchas, &c.

_Mollify._ Saffron, white Lilies, Mallows, Marsh-mallows, &c.

_Suppure._ Saffron, white Lilies, &c.

_Glutinate._ Balaustines, Centaury, &c.

_Provoke the terms._ Bettony, Centaury, Chamomel, Schœnanth,
Wall-flowers, Bawm Peony, Rosemary, Sage.

_Stop the terms._ Balaustines, or Pomegranate flowers, Water Lilies.

_Expel wind._ Dill, Chamomel, Schœnanth, Spikenard.

_Help burnings._ White Lilies, Mallows, Marsh-mallows.

_Resist poison._ Bettony, Centaury.

_Ease pain._ Dill, Chamomel, Centaury, Melilot, Rosemary.

_Flowers purge choler._ Peach flowers, Damask Roses, Violets.

_Flegm._ Broom flowers, Elder flowers.

If you compare but the quality of the flowers with the herbs, and with
the explanation of these terms at the latter end, you may easily find
the temperature and property of the rest.

The flowers of Ox-eye being boiled into a poultice with a little barley
meal, take away swellings and hardness of the flesh, being applied warm
to the place.

Chamomel flowers heat, discuss, loosen and rarify, boiled in Clysters,
they are excellent in the wind cholic, boiled in wine, and the
decoction drunk, purges the reins, break the stone, opens the pores,
cast out choleric humours, succours the heart, and eases pains and
aches, or stiffness coming by travelling.

The flowers of Rocket used outwardly, discuss swellings, and dissolve
hard tumors, you may boil them into a poultice, but inwardly taken they
send but unwholesome vapours up to the head.

Hops open obstructions of the bowels, liver, and spleen, they cleanse
the body of choler and flegm, provoke urine.

Jasmine flowers boiled in oil, and the grieved place bathed with it,
takes away cramps and stitches in the sides.

The flowers of Woodbine, or Honeysuckles, being dryed and beaten
into powder, and a dram taken in white wine in the morning, helps
the rickets, difficulty of breathing; provoke urine, and help the
stranguary.

The flowers of Mallows being bruised and boiled in honey (two ounces
of the flowers is sufficient for a pound of honey; and having first
clarified the honey before you put them in) then strained out; this
honey taken with a liquorice stick, is an excellent remedy for Coughs,
Asthmas, and consumptions of the lungs.


    FRUITS.

College.] _Winter-cherries, Love Apples, Almonds sweet and bitter,
Anacardia, Oranges, Hazel Nuts, the oily Nut Ben, Barberries, Capers,
Guinny Pepper, Figs, Carpobalsamum, Cloves, Cassia Fistula, Chestnuts,
Cherries black and red, Cicers, white, black and red, Pome Citrons,
Coculus Indi, Colocynthis, Currants, Cornels or Cornelian Cherries,
Cubebs, Cucumbers garden and wild, Gourds, Cynosbatus, Cypress, Cones,
Quinces, Dates, Dwarf-Elder, Green Figs, Strawberries, common and
Turkey Galls, Acorns, Acorn Cups, Pomegranates, Gooseberries, Ivy,
Herb True-Love, Walnuts, Jujubes, Juniper berries, Bayberries, Lemons,
Oranges, Citrons, Quinces, Pomegranates, Lemons, Mandrakes, Peaches,
Stramonium, Apples, garden and wild, or Crabs and Apples, Musk Melons,
Medlars, Mulberries, Myrobalans, Bellericks, Chebs, Emblicks, Citron
and Indian, Mirtle, Berries, water Nuts, Hazel Nuts, Chestnuts, Cypress
Nuts, Walnuts, Nutmegs, Fistick Nuts, Vomiting Nuts, Olives pickled in
brine, Heads of white and black Poppies, Pompions, Peaches, French or
Kidney Beans, Pine, Cones, white, black, and long Pepper, Fistick Nuts,
Apples and Crabs, Prunes, French and Damask, Sloes, Pears, English
Currants, Berries of Purging Thorn, black Berries, Raspberries, Elder
berries, Sebastens, Services, or Checkers, Hawthorn berries, Pine Nuts,
Water Nuts, Grapes, Gooseberries, Raisins, Currants._

_Culpeper._] That you may reap benefit by these, be pleased to
consider, that they are some of them

_Temperate in respect of heat._ Raisins of the sun, Currants, Figs,
Pine Nuts, Dates, Sebastens.

_Hot in the first degree._ Sweet Almonds, Jujubes, Cypress Nuts, green
Hazel Nuts, green Walnuts.

_Hot in the second degree._ The Nut Ben, Capers, Nutmegs, dry Walnuts,
dry Hazel Nuts, Fistick Nuts.

_In the third degree._ Juniper Berries, Cloves, Carpobalsamum, Cubebs,
Anacardium, bitter Almonds.

_In the fourth degree._ Pepper, white, black and long, Guinny Pepper.

_Cold in the first degree._ The flesh of Citrons, Quinces, Pears,
Prunes, &c.

_In the second._ Gourds, Cucumbers, Melons, Pompions, Oranges, Lemons,
Citrons, Pomegranates, viz. the juice of them, Peaches, Prunes, Galls,
Apples.

_In the third._ Mandrakes.

_In the fourth._ Stramonium.

_Moist in the first degree._ The flesh of Citrons, Lemons, Oranges,
viz. the inner rhind which is white, the outer rhind is hot.

_In the second._ Gourds, Melons, Peaches, Prunes, &c.

_Dry in the first degree._ Juniper Berries.

_In the second._ The Nut Ben, Capers, Pears, Fistick Nuts, Pine Nuts,
Quinces, Nutmegs, Bay berries.

_In the third._ Cloves, Galls, &c.

_In the fourth._ All sorts of pepper.

    _As appropriated to the body of Man, so they
    heat the head: as_

Anacardia, Cubebs, Nutmegs.

_The breast._ Bitter Almonds, Dates, Cubebs, Hazel Nuts, Pine Nuts,
Figs, Raisins of the sun, Jujubes.

_The heart._ Walnuts, Nutmegs, Juniper berries.

_The stomach._ Sweet Almonds, Cloves, Ben, Juniper berries, Nutmegs,
Pine Nuts, Olives.

_The spleen._ Capers.

_The reins and bladder._ Bitter Almonds, Juniper Berries, Cubebs, Pine
Nuts, Raisins of the sun.

_The womb._ Walnuts, Nutmegs, Bayberries, Juniper berries.

_Cool the breast._ Sebastens, Prunes, Oranges, Lemons.

_The heart._ Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Pomegranates, Quinces, Pears.

_The stomach._ Quinces, Citruls, Cucumbers, Gourds, Musk Melons,
Pompions, Cherries, Gooseberries, Cornelian Cherries, Lemons, Apples,
Medlars, Oranges, Pears, English Currants, Cervices or Checkers.

_The liver._ Those that cool the stomach and Barberries.

_The reins and womb._ Those that cool the stomach, and Strawberries.

    _By their several operations, some_

_Bind._ As the berries of Mirtles, Barberries, Chestnuts, Cornels,
or Cornelian Cherries, Quinces, Galls, Acorns, Acorn-cups, Medlars,
Checkers or Cervices, Pomegranates, Nutmegs, Olives, Pears, Peaches.

_Discuss._ Capers, all the sorts of Pepper.

_Extenuate._ Sweet and bitter Almonds, Bayberries, Juniper berries.

_Glutinate._ Acorns, Acorn Cups, Dates, Raisins of the sun, Currants.

_Expel Wind._ Bay berries, Juniper berries, Nutmegs, all the sorts of
Pepper.

_Breed seed._ Raisins of the sun, sweet Almonds, Pine Nuts, Figs, &c.

_Provoke urine._ Winter Cherries.

_Provoke the terms._ Ivy berries, Capers, &c.

_Stop the terms._ Barberries, &c.

_Resist poison._ Bay berries, Juniper berries, Walnuts, Citrons,
commonly called Pome Citrons, all the sorts of Pepper.

_Ease pain._ Bay berries, Juniper berries, Ivy berries, Figs, Walnuts,
Raisins, Currants, all the sorts of Pepper.

    _Fruits purging._

_Choler._ Cassia Fistula, Citron Myrobalans, Prunes, Tamarinds, Raisins.

_Melancholy._ Indian Myrobalans.

_Flegm._ Colocynthis and wild Cucumbers purge violently, and therefore
not rashly to be meddled withal: I desire my book should be beneficial,
not hurtful to the vulgar, but Myrobalans of all sorts, especially
Chebs, Bellericks and Emblicks, purge flegm very gently, and without
danger.

Of all these give me leave to commend only one to you as of special
concernment which is Juniper berries.


    SEEDS.

College.] _Sorrel, Agnus Castus, Marsh-mallows, Bishop’s weed true
and common, Amomus, Dill, Angellica, Annis, Rose-seed, Smallage,
Columbines, Sparagus, Arach, Oats, Oranges, Burdocks, Bazil,
Barberries, Cotton, Bruscus or Knee-holly, Hemp, Cardamoms greater and
lesser, Carduus Benedictus, our Lady’s Thistles, Bastard, Saffron,
Caraway, Spurge greater and lesser, Coleworts, Onions, the Kernels of
Cherry stones, Chervil, Succory, Hemlock, Citrons, Citruls, Garden
Scurvy-grass, Colocynthis, Coriander, Samphire, Cucumbers garden
and wild, Gourds, Quinces, Cummin, Cynosbatus, Date-stones, Carrots
English, and cretish, Dwarf-Elder, Endive, Rocket, Hedge Mustard,
Orobus, Beans, Fennel, Fenugreek, Ash-tree keys, Fumitory, Brooms,
Grains of Paradise, Pomegranates, wild Rue, Alexanders, Barley, white
Henbane, St. John’s Wort, Hyssop, Lettice, Sharp-pointed-Dock, Spurge,
Laurel, Lentils, Lovage, Lemons, Ash-tree-keys, Linseed, or Flaxweed,
Gromwell, Darnel, Sweet Trefoil, Lupines, Masterwort, Marjoram,
Mallows, Mandrakes, Melons, Medlars, Mezereon, Gromwell, sweet Navew,
Nigella, the kernels of Cherries, Apricots, and Peaches, Bazil, Orobus,
Rice, Panick, Poppies white and black, Parsnips garden and wild,
Thorough Wax, Parsley, English and Macedonian, Burnet, Pease, Plantain,
Peony, Leeks, Purslain, Fleawort, Turnips, Radishes, Sumach, Spurge,
Roses, Rue, garden and wild, Wormseed, Saxifrage, Succory, Sesami,
Hartwort, common and cretish, Mustard-seed, Alexanders, Nightshade,
Steves Ager, Sumach, Treacle, Mustard, sweet Trefoil, Wheat, both the
fine flour and the bran, and that which starch is made of, Vetches or
Tares, Violets, Nettles, common and Roman, the stones of Grapes, Greek
Wheat, or Spelt Wheat._

_Culpeper._] That you may receive a little more benefit by these, than
the bare reading of them, which doth at the most but tell you what they
are; the following method may instruct you what they are good for.

    _Seeds are hot in the first degree._

Linseed, Fenugreek, Coriander, Rice, Gromwell, Lupines.

_In the second._ Dill, Smallage, Orobus, Rocket, Bazil, Nettles.

_In the third._ Bishop’s Weed, Annis, Amomus, Carraway, Fennel, (and
so I believe Smallage too, let authors say what they will, for if the
herb of Smallage be somewhat hotter than Parsley; I know little reason
why the seed should not be so hot) Cardamoms, Parsley, Cummin, Carrots,
Nigella, Navew, Hartwort, Staves Ager.

_In the fourth._ Water-cresses, Mustard-seed.

_Cold in the first degree._ Barley, &c.

_In the second._ Endive, Lettice, Purslain, Succory, Gourds, Cucumbers,
Melons, Citruls, Pompions, Sorrel, Nightshade.

_In the third._ Henbane, Hemlock, Poppies white and black.

_Moist in the first degree._ Mallows, &c.

_Dry in the first degree._ Beans, Fennel, Fenugreek, Barley, Wheat, &c.

_In the second._ Orobus, Lentils, Rice, Poppies, Nightshade, and the
like.

_In the third._ Dill, Smallages, Bishop’s Weed, Annis, Caraway, Cummin,
Coriander, Nigella, Gromwell, Parsley.

    _Appropriated to the body of man, and so they_

_Heat the head._ Fennel, Marjoram, Peony, &c.

_The breast._ Nettles.

_The heart._ Bazil, Rue, &c. Mustard seed, &c.

_The stomach._ Annis, Bishop’s weed, Amomus, Smallage, Cummin,
Cardamoms, Cubebs, Grains of Paradise.

_The liver._ Annis, Fennel, Bishop’s weed, Amomus, Smallage, Sparagus,
Cummin, Caraway, Carrots.

_The spleen._ Annis, Caraway, Water-cresses.

_The reins and bladder._ Cicers, Rocket, Saxifrage, Nettles, Gromwell.

_The womb._ Peony, Rue.

_The joints._ Water-cresses, Rue, Mustard-seed.

_Cool the head._ Lettice, Purslain, white Poppies.

_The breast._ White Poppies, Violets.

_The heart._ Orange, Lemon, Citron and Sorrel seeds.

Lastly, the four greater and four lesser cold seeds, which you may find
in the beginning of the compositions, as also the seed of white and
black Poppies cool the liver and spleen, reins and bladder, womb and
joints.

    _According to operation some seeds_

_Bind, as_ Rose-seeds, Barberries, Shepherd’s purse, Purslain, &c.

_Discuss._ Dill, Carrots, Linseeds, Fenugreek, Nigella, &c.

_Cleanse._ Beans, Orobus, Barley, Lupines, Nettles, &c.

_Mollify._ Linseed, or Flax seed, Fenugreek seed, Mallows, Nigella.

_Harden._ Purslain seed, &c.

_Suppure._ Linseed, Fenugreek seed, Darnel, Barley husked, commonly
called French Barley.

_Glutinate._ Orobus, Lupines, Darnel, &c.

_Expel wind._ Annis, Dill, Smallage, Caraway, Cummin, Carrots, Fennel,
Nigella, Parsley, Hartwort, Wormseed.

_Breed seed._ Rocket, Beans, Cicers, Ash tree keys.

_Provoke the menses._ Amomus, Sparagus, Annis, Fennel, Bishop’s weed,
Cicers, Carrots, Smallage, Parsley, Lovage, Hartwort.

_Break the stone._ Mallows, Marsh-mallows, Gromwell, &c.

_Stop the terms._ Rose seeds, Cummin, Burdock, &c.

_Resist poison._ Bishop’s weed, Annis, Smallage, Cardamoms, Oranges,
Lemons, Citrons, Fennel, &c.

_Ease pain._ Dill, Amomus, Cardamoms, Cummin, Carrots, Orobus,
Fenugreek, Linseed, Gromwell, Parsley, Panick.

_Assuage swellings._ Linseed, Fenugreek seeds, Marsh-mallows, Mallows,
Coriander, Barley, Lupines, Darnel, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

The College tells you a tale that there are such things in Rerum
Natura, as these, Gums, Rozins, Balsams, and Juices made thick, viz.

College.] _Juices of Wormwood and Maudlin, Acacia, Aloes, Lees of Oil,
Assafœtida, Balsam of Peru and India; Bdellium, Benzoin, Camphire,
Caranna, Colophonia, Juice of Maudlin, Euphorbium, Lees of Wine, Lees
of Oil, Gums of Galbanum, Amoniacum, Anime, Arabick, Cherry Trees,
Copal, Elemy, Juniper, Ivy, Plumb Trees, Cambuge, Hypocystis, Labdanum,
Lacca, Liquid Amber, Manna, Mastich, Myrrh, Olibanum, Opium, Opopanax,
Pice-bitumen, Pitch of the Cedar of Greece, Liquid and dry Rozins of
Fir-tree, Larch-tree, Pine tree, Pine-fruit, Mastich. Venice and Cyprus
Turpentine. Sugar, white, red, and Christaline, or Sugar Candy white
and red, Sagapen, Juniper, Gum, Sanguis Draconis, Sarcocolla, Scamony,
Styrax, Liquid and Calamitis, Tacha, Mahacca, Tartar, Frankincense,
Olibanum, Tragaganth, Birdlime._

_Culpeper._] That my country may receive more benefit than ever the
college of Physicians intended them from these, I shall treat of them
severally.

    1. Of the Juices.
    2. Of the Gums and Rosins.

    _Concrete Juices, or Juices made thick, are either_

_Temperate_, _as_, Juice of Liquorice, white starch.

_Hot in the first degree._ Sugar.

_In the second._ Labdanum.

_In the third._ Benzoin, Assafœtida.

_Cold in the third degree._ Sanguis Draconis, Acacia.

_In the third._ Hypocistis.

_In the fourth._ Opium, and yet some authors think Opium is hot because
of its bitter taste.

_Aloes and Manna_ purge choler gently; and Scamony doth purge choler
violently, that it is no ways fit for a vulgar man’s use, for it
corrodes the Bowels. Opopoanax purges flegm very gently.

_White starch_ gently levigates or makes smooth such parts as are
rough, syrup of Violets being made thick with it and so taken on the
point of a knife, helps coughs, roughness of the throat, wheezing,
excoriations of the bowels, the bloody-flux.

Juice of _Liquorice_ helps roughness of the _Trachea Arteria_, which
is in plain English called the windpipe, the roughness of which causes
coughs and hoarseness, difficulty of breathing, &c. It allays the heat
of the stomach and liver, eases pains, soreness and roughness of the
reins and bladder, it quencheth thirst, and strengthens the stomach
exceedingly: It may easily be carried about in one’s pocket, and eat a
little now and then.

_Sugar_ cleanses and digests, takes away roughness of the tongue, it
strengthens the reins and bladder, being weakened: being beaten into
fine powder and put into the eyes, it takes away films that grow over
the sight.

_Labdanum_ is in operation, thickening, heating and mollifying, it
opens the passage of the veins, and keeps the hair from falling off;
the use of it is usually external: being mixed with wine, myrrh, and
oil of mirtles, and applied like a plaister, it takes away filthy
scars, and the deformity the small pox leaves behind them; being mixed
with oil of Roses, and dropped into the ears, it helps pains there;
being used as a pessary, it provokes the menses, and helps hardness or
stiffness of the womb. It is sometimes used inwardly in such medicines
as ease pains and help the cough: if you mix a little of it with old
white wine and drink it, it both provokes urine and stops looseness or
fluxes.

_Dragons blood_, cools, binds, and repels.

_Acasia_, and _Hyposistis_, do the like.

The juice of _Maudlin_, or, for want of it Costmary, which is the same
in effect, and better known to the vulgar, the juice is made thick for
the better keeping of it; first clarify the juice before you boil it to
its due thickness, which is something thicker than honey.

It is appropriated to the liver, and the quantity of a dram taken
every morning, helps the _Cachexia_, or evil disposition of the
body proceeding from coldness of the liver: it helps the rickets
and worms in children, provokes urine, and gently (without purging)
disburdens the body of choler and flegm; it succours the lungs, opens
obstructions, and resists putrifaction of blood.

_Gums are either temperate_, _as_, Lacca, Elemi, Tragacanth, &c.

_Intemperate_, _and so are hot in the first degree_, as Bdellium, Gum
of Ivy.

_In the second_, Galbanum, Myrrh, Mastich, Frankincense, Olibanum,
Pitch, Rozin, Styrax.

_In the third._ Amoniacum.

_In the fourth._ Euphorbium.

Gum Arabick is cold.

Colophonia and Styrax soften.

Gum Arabick and Tragacanth, Sandarack or Juniper Gum, and Sarcocolla
bind.

Gum of Cherry trees, breaks the stone.

Styrax provokes the menses.

Opopanax gently purges flegm.

From the prickly _Cedar_ when it is burned comes forth that which, with
us, is usually known by the name of Tar, and is excellently good for
unction either for scabs, itch, or manginess, either in men or beasts,
as also against the leprosy, tetters, ringworms, and scald heads.

All sorts of _Rozins_ fill up hollow ulcers, and relieve the body sore
pressed with cold griefs.

The _Rozin_ of Pitch-tree, is that which is commonly called Burgundy
pitch, and is something hotter and sharper than the former, being
spread upon a cloth is excellently good for old aches coming of former
bruises or dislocations.

_Pitch_ mollifies hard swellings, and brings boils and sores to
suppuration, it breaks carbuncles, disperses aposthumes, cleanses
ulcers of corruption and fills them with flesh.

_Bdellium_ heats and mollifies, and that very temperately, being mixed
with any convenient ointment or plaister, it helps kernels in the neck
and throat, _Scrophula_, or that disease which was called the King’s
Evil. Inwardly taken in any convenient medicine, it provokes the
menses, and breaks the stone, it helps coughs and bitings of venomous
beasts: it helps windiness of the spleen, and pains in the sides thence
coming. Both outwardly applied to the place and inwardly taken, it
helps ruptures or such as are burst, it softens the hardness of the
womb, dries up the moisture thereof and expels the dead child.

_Bitumen Jadaicum_ is a certain dry pitch which the dead sea, or lake
of _Sodom in India_ casts forth at certain times, the inhabitants
thereabouts pitch their ships with it. It is of excellent use to
mollify the hardness of swellings and discuss them, as also against
inflammations; the smoke of it burnt is excellently good for the fits
of the mother, and the falling-sickness: Inwardly taken in wine
it provokes the menses, helps the bitings of venomous beasts, and
dissolves congealed blood in the body.

_Ambergreese_ is hot and dry in the second degree, I will not dispute
whether it be a Gum or not: It strengthens nature much which way
soever it be taken, there are but few grains usually given of it at a
time: mixed with a little ointment of Orange flowers, and the temples
and forehead anointed with it, it eases the pains of the head and
strengthens the brain exceedingly; the same applied to the privities,
helps the fits of the mother; inwardly taken it strengthens the brain
and memory, the heart and vital spirit, warms cold stomachs, and is
an exceeding strengthener of nature to old people, adding vigour to
decayed and worn-out spirits: it provokes venery, and makes barren
women fruitful, if coldness and moisture or weakness be the cause
impediting.

_Assafœtida_ being smelled to, is vulgarly known to repress the fits of
the mother; a little bit put into an aching tooth, presently eases the
pain, ten grains of it taken before dinner, walking half an hour after
it, provokes appetite, helps digestion, strengthens the stomach, and
takes away loathing of meat, it provokes lust exceedingly and expels
wind as much.

_Borax_, besides the virtues it has to solder Gold, Silver, Copper, &c.
inwardly given in small quantities, it stops fluxes, and the running of
the reins: being in fine powder, and put into green wounds, it cures
them at once dressing.

_Gambuge_, which the College calls _Gutta Gamba_. I know no good of it.

_Caranna_ outwardly applied, is excellent for aches and swellings in
the nerves and joints: If you lay it behind the ears, it draws back
humours from the eyes; applied to the temples as they usually do
Mastich, it helps the tooth-ache.

_Gum Elimi_, authors appropriate to fractures in the skull and head.
See _Arceus’_ liniment.

_Gum Lacca_ being well purified, and the quantity of half a dram taken
in any convenient liquor, strengthens the stomach and liver, opens
obstructions, helps the yellow jaundice and dropsy; provokes urine,
breaks the stone in the reins and bladder.

Liquid _Amber_ is not much unlike liquid _Styrax_: by unction it warms
and comforts a cold and moist brain, it eases all griefs coming of
a cold cause, it mightily comforts and strengthens a weak stomach,
being anointed with it, and helps digestion exceedingly, it dissolves
swellings. It is hot in the third degree, and moist in the first.

I think it would do the commonwealth no harm if I should speak a word
or two on _Manna_ here, although it be no Gum: I confess authors make
some flutter about it, what it is, some holding it to be the juice
of a tree; I am confident it is the very same condensated that our
honey-dews here are, only the contries whence it comes being far
hotter, it falls in great abundance. Let him that desires reason for
it, be pleased to read _Butler’s_ book of Bees, a most excellent
experimental work, there he shall find reason enough to satisfy any
reasonable man. Choose the driest and whitest; it is a very gentle
purger of choler, quenches thirst, provokes appetite, eases the
roughness of the throat, helps bitterness in the throat, and often
proneness to vomit, it is very good for such as are subject to be
costive to put it into their drink instead of sugar, it hath no
obnoxious quality at all in it, but may be taken by a pregnant woman
without any danger; a child of a year old may take an ounce of it at
a time dissolved in milk, it will melt like sugar, neither will it be
known from it by the taste.

_Myrrh_ is hot and dry in the second degree, dangerous for pregnant
women, it is bitter, and yet held to be good for the roughness of
the throat and wind-pipe; half a dram of it taken at a time helps
rheumatic distillations upon the lungs, pains in the sides; it stops
fluxes, provokes the menses, brings away both birth and after-birth,
softens the hardness of the womb; being taken two hours before the
fit comes, it helps agues. _Mathiolus_ saith he seldom used any other
medicine for the quartan ague than a dram of myrrh given in Muskadel
an hour before the fit usually came; if you make it up into pills with
treacle, and take one of them every morning fasting, it is a sovereign
preservative against the pestilence, against the poison of serpents,
and other venomous beasts; a singular remedy for a stinking breath if
it arise from putrefaction of the stomach, it fastens loose teeth, and
stays the shedding off of the hair, outwardly used it breeds flesh in
deep wounds, and covers the naked bones with flesh.

_Olibanum_ is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first, you may
take a dram of it at a time, it stops looseness and the running of
the reins; it strengthens the memory exceedingly, comforts the heart,
expels sadness and melancholy, strengthens the heart, helps coughs,
rheums and pleurises; your best way (in my opinion,) to take it is to
mix it with conserve of roses, and take it in the morning fasting.

_Tachamacha_ is seldom taken inwardly, outwardly spread upon leather,
and applied to the navel; it stays the fits of the mother, applied to
the side, it mitigates speedily, and in little time quite takes away
the pain and windiness of the spleen; the truth is, whatsoever ache
or swelling proceeds of wind or cold raw humours, I know no better
plaister coming from beyond sea than this gum. It strengthens the
brain and memory exceedingly, and stops all such defluctions thence as
trouble the eyes, ears, or teeth, it helps the gout and sciatica.

_Gum Coopal, and Gum Anime_, are very like one another both in body and
operation, the former is hard to come by, the last not very easy. It
stops defluctions from the head, if you perfume your cap with the smoke
of it, it helps the headache and megrim, strengthens the brain, and
therefore the sinews.

_Gum Tragaganth_, which the vulgar call Gum Dragon, being mixed with
pectoral Syrups, (which you shall find noted in their proper places)
it helps coughs and hoarseness, salt and sharp distillations upon the
lungs, being taken with a liquorice stick, being dissolved in sweet
wine, it helps (being drank) gnawing in the bowels, sharpness and
freetings of the urine, which causes excoriations either in the reins
or bladder, being dissolved in milk and the eyes washed with it, it
takes away weals and scabs that grow on the eyelids, it is excellently
good to be put in poultice to fodder wounds, especially if the nerves
or sinews be hurt.

_Sagapen_, dissolved in juice of rue and taken, wonderfully breaks the
stone in the bladder, expels the dead child and afterbirth, clears
the sight; dissolved in wine and drank, it helps the cough, and
distillation upon the lungs, and the fits of the mother; outwardly
in oils or ointments, it helps such members as are out of joint or
over-stretched.

_Galbanum_ is of the same operation, and also taken from the same
plant, _viz._ Fennel, Giant.

_Gum Arabic_, thickens and cools, and corrects choleric sharp humours
in the body, being dissolved in the white of an egg, well beaten, it
helps burnings, and keeps the place from blistering.

_Mastich_ stays fluxes, being taken inwardly any way. Three or four
small grains of Mastich, swallowed at night going to bed, is a remedy
for pains in the stomach, being beaten into powder, and mixed with
conserve of Roses, it strengthens the stomach, stops distillations
upon the lungs, stay, vomiting, and causes a sweet breath; being mixed
with white wine and the mouth washed with it, it cleanses the gums of
corruption, and fastens loose teeth.

_Frankincense_ being used outwardly in the way of a plaister, heats and
binds; being applied to the temples, stops the rheums that flow to the
eyes, helps green wounds, and fills hollow ulcers with flesh, stops
the bleeding of wounds, though the arteries be cut; being made into an
ointment with Vinegar and Hog’s-grease, helps the itch, pains in the
ears, inflammations in women’s breasts commonly called agues in the
breast; beware of taking it inwardly, lest it cause madness.

_Turpentine_ is hot in the second degree, it heals, softens, it
discusses and purges, cleanses the reins, provokes urine.

_Styrax Calamitis_ is hot and dry in the second degree, it heals,
mollifies, and concocts; being taken inwardly helps the cough, and
distillations of the lungs, hoarseness and loss of voice, helps the
hardness of the womb, and provokes the menses.

_Ammoniacum_, hot and dry in the third degree, softens, draws, and
heats; being dissolved in vinegar, strained and applied plaister-wise,
it takes away carbuncles and hardness in the flesh, it is one of the
best remedies that I know for infirmities of the spleen, being applied
to the left side; being made into an ointment with oil, it is good to
anoint the limbs of such as are weary: a scruple of it being taken in
the form of a pill loosens the belly, gives speedy delivery to women in
travail, helps diseases of the spleen, the sciatica and all pains in
the joints, and have any humour afflicting their breast.

_Camphire_, it is held by all authority to be cold and dry in the
third degree, it is of very thin subtile parts, insomuch that being
beaten into very fine powder it will vanquish away into the air,
being beaten into powder and mixed with oil, and the temples anointed
therewith, eases headaches proceeding of heat, all inflammations
whatsoever, the back being anointed with the same, cools the reins,
and seminal vessels, stops the running of the reins and Fluor Albus,
the moderate use of Venery, the like it doth if it be drank inwardly
with Bettony-water, take but a small quantity of it at a time inwardly,
it resist poison and bitings by venomous beasts; outwardly, applied
as before, and the eyes anointed with it, stops hot rheums that flow
thither.

_Opopanax_ purges thick flegm from the most remote parts of the body,
_viz._ the brain, joints, hands, and feet, the nerves and breast, and
strengthens all those parts when they are weak, if the weakness proceed
of cold, as usually it doth; it helps weakness of the sight, old rotten
coughs, and gouts of all sorts, dropsies, and swellings of the spleen,
it helps the stranguary and difficulty of making urine, provokes the
menses, and helps all cold afflictions of the womb; have a care you
give it not to any pregnant women. The dose is one dram at most,
corrected with a little Mastich, dissolved in Vinegar and outwardly
applied helps the passions of the spleen.

       *       *       *       *       *

    In the next place the College tells you a tale concerning
    Liquid, Juices, and Tears, which are to be kept for present
    use, _viz._

College.] _Vinegar, Juice of Citrons, Juice of sour Grapes, Oranges,
Barberries, Tears of a Birch-tree, Juice of Cherries, Quinces,
Pomegranates, Lemons, Wood-sorrel, Oil of unripe Olives, and ripe
Olives, both new and old, Juice of red and Damask Roses, Wine Tears of
a Vine._

_Culpeper._] The virtues of the most of these may be found in the
Syrups, and are few of them used alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Then the College tells you there are things bred of PLANTS.

College.] _Agarick, Jew’s-ears, the berries of Chermes, the Spungy
substance of the Briar, Moss, Viscus Quercinus, Oak, Apples._

_Culpeper._] As the College would have you know this, so would I know
what the chief of them are good for.

_Jew’s-ears_ boiled in milk and drank, helps sore throats.

_Moss_ is cold, dry, and binding, therefore good for fluxes of all
sorts.

_Misleto of the Oak_, it helps the falling sickness and the
convulsions; being discreetly gathered and used.

_Oak Apples_ are dry and binding; being boiled in milk and drank, they
stop fluxes and the menses, and being boiled in vinegar, and the body
anointed with the vinegar, cures the itch.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Then the College acquaints you, That there are certain
    living Creatures called

College.] _Bees, Woodlice, Silkworms, Toads, Crabs of the River, little
Puppy Dogs, Grass-hoppers, Cantharides, Cothanel, Hedge-hogs, Emmets
or Ants, Larks, Swallows, and their young ones, Horse-leeches, Snails,
Earthworms, Dishwashers or Wagtails, House Sparrows and Hedge Sparrows,
Frogs, Scineus, Land Scorpions, Moles, or Monts, Tortoise of the Woods,
Tenches, Vipers and Foxes._

_Culpeper._] That part of this crew of Cattle and some others which
they have not been pleased to learn, may be made beneficial to your
sick bodies, be pleased to understand, that

_Bees_ being burnt to ashes, and a lye made with the ashes, trimly
decks a bald head being washed with it.

_Snails_ with shells on their backs, being first washed from the dirt,
then the shells broken, and they boiled in spring water, but not
scummed at all, for the scum will sink of itself, and the water drank
for ordinary drink is a most admirable remedy for consumption; being
bruised and applied to the place they help the gout, draw thorns out of
the flesh, and held to the nose help the bleeding thereof.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Therefore consider that the College gave the Apothecaries
    a catalogue of what _Parts of Living creatures_ and
    _Excrements_ they must keep in their shops.

College.] _The fat, grease, or suet, of a Duck, Goose, Eel, Boar,
Herron, Thymallows, (_if you know where to get it_) Dog, Capon,
Beaver, wild Cat, Stork, Coney, Horse, Hedge-hog, Hen, Man, Lion, Hare,
Pike, or Jack, (_if they have any fat, I am persuaded ’tis worth
twelve-pence a grain_) Wolf, Mouse of the mountains, (_if you
can catch them_) Pardal, Hog, Serpent, Badger, Grey or brock Fox,
Vulture, (_if you can catch them_) Album Græcum, Anglice, Dog’s
dung, the hucklebone of a Hare and a Hog, East and West Bezoar, Butter
not salted and salted, stone taken out of a man’s bladder, Vipers
flesh, fresh Cheese, Castorium, white, yellow, and Virgin’s Wax, the
brain of Hares and Sparrows, Crabs’ Claws, the Rennet of a Lamb, a Kid,
a Hare, a Calf, and a Horse, the heart of a Bullock, a Stag, Hog, and
a Wether, the horn of an Elk, a Hart, a Rhinoceros, an Unicorn, the
skull of a man killed by a violent death, a Cockscomb, the tooth of a
Boar, an Elephant, and a Sea-horse, Ivory, or Elephant’s Tooth, the
skin a Snake hath cast off, the gall of a Hawk, Bullock, a she Goat,
a Hare, a Kite, a Hog, a Bull, a Bear, the cases of Silk-worms, the
liver of a Wolf, an Otter, a Frog, Isinglass, the guts of a Wolf and
a Fox, the milk of a she Ass, a she Goat, a Woman, an Ewe, a Heifer,
East and West Bezoar, the stone in the head of a Crab, and a Perch, if
there be any stone in an Ox Gall, stone in the bladder of a Man, the
Jaw of a Pike or Jack, Pearls, the marrow of the Leg of a Sheep, Ox,
Goat, Stag, Calf, common and virgin Honey, Musk, Mummy, a Swallow’s
nest, Crabs Eyes, the Omentum or call of a Lamb, Ram, Wether, Calf,
the whites, yolks, and shells of Hen’s Eggs, Emmet’s Eggs, bone of a
Stag’s heart, an Ox leg, Ossepiœ, the inner skin of a Hen’s Gizzard,
the wool of Hares, the feathers of Partridges, that which Bees make at
the entrance of the hive, the pizzle of a Stag, of a Bull, Fox Lungs,
fasting spittle, the blood of a Pigeon, of a Cat, of a he Goat, of a
Hare, of a Partridge, of a Sow, of a Bull, of a Badger, of a Snail,
Silk, Whey, the suet of a Bullock, of a Stag, of a he Goat, of a Sheep,
of a Heifer, Spermaceti, a Bullock’s spleen, the skin a Snake hath cast
off, the excrements of a Goose, of a Dog, of a Goat, of Pigeons, of a
stone Horse, of a Hen, of Swallows, of a Hog, of a Heifer, the ancle of
a Hare, of a Sow, Cobwebs, Water thells, as Blatta Bazantia, Buccinæ,
Crabs, Cockles, Dentalis, Entalis, Mother of Pearl, Mytuli Purpuræ, Os
sepiæ, Umbilious Marinus, the testicles of a Horse, a Cock, the hoof
of an Elk, of an Ass, a Bullock, of a Horse, of a Lyon, the urine of a
Boar, of a she Goat._

_Culpeper._] The liver of an Hedge-hog being dried and beaten into
powder and drank in wine, strengthens the reins exceedingly, and helps
the dropsy, convulsions, and the falling sickness, together with all
fluxes of the bowels.

The liver being in like manner brought into powder, strengthens the
liver exceedingly, and helps the dropsy.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Then the College tells you these things may
    be taken from the SEA, as

College.] _Amber-grease, Sea-water, Sea-sand, Bitumen, Amber white and
yellow, Jet, Carlinæ, Coral, white and red, Foam of the Sea, Spunge,
Stone Pumice, Sea salt, Spunges, Amber._




    METALS, STONES, SALTS, AND
    OTHER MINERALS.


_Ver-de-grease, Scales of Brass, Ætitis, Alana Terra, Alabaster,
Alectorions, Alum Seisile and Roach Amethist, Amianth, Amphelites,
Antimony, leaves and filings of Silver, Quick Silver, Lapis, Armenius,
native Arsenic, both white and red, artificial Arsenic, white and
realgar, Argilla, Asteria, leaves and filings of Gold, Belemites,
Berril, Bole-armenick, Borrax, Toad-stone, Lapis Calaminatis, Cadmia,
Lime quick and quenched, Vitriol, white, blue, and green, Steel,
Borrax, Chrisolite, Chrisopus, Cynabris, native and artificial,
Whetstones, Chalk, white and green, Crystal Diphriges, the rust, dust,
scales, and flakes of Iron, Granite, Mortar, such as walls are daubed
with, Hematitis, Heliotropium, Jacinth, Hyber, Nicius, Jasper, Lapis
Judacious, Tiles, Lapis Lazuly, Lapis Lincis, Lithanthrax, Litharge
of Silver and Gold, Loadstone, Marchasite, or fire stone Marble, Red
Lead, native and artificial, Miss, Naptha, Lapis Nephriticus, Nitre,
Oaker yellow and red, Onyx, Opalus, Ophytes, Ostcocolla, Lead white
and black, Plumbago, Pompholix, Marchasite, Realgar, Ruby, red Oaker,
Sal Armoniach, Sal Gem, and salt Nitre, Saphyr and Sardine, Selenitis,
Flints, Emerald, Smiris, Sori, Spodium, Pewter, Brimstone, quick and
common, Talth, Earth of Cimolia, Sames, Lemnos, Sylesia, Topas, Alana,
Terra, Tutty, Vitriol, white, blue, and green._

    _Precious stones alter by a way manifest or
    hidden._

_By a way manifest, they are hot, in the first degree._ Hemetitis,
Pyritis, Lopis Asius, Thyitis, Smyres, Lapis Schistus.

_Precious stones cold, are in the first degree._ Jacinth, Saphyr,
Emerald, Cristal, Lapis Samius, Lapis Phrigius.

_In the second degree._ Ruby, Carbuncle, Granite, Sardony.

_In the fourth degree._ Diamond.

_In respect of property, they bind_, _as_ Lapis Asius, Nectius, Geodes,
Pumice-stone.

_Emolient_, _as_ Alabaster, Jet, Lapis Thrasius.

_Stupify_: _as_ Memphitis, Jasper, Ophites.

_Cleanse_: _as_ Lapis Arabicus.

_Glutinate_: _as_ Galactitis, Melites.

_Scarify_: _as_ Morochtus.

_Break the stone_: _as_ Lapis Lyncis, Lapis Judaicus, Lapis Sponge.

_Retain the fruit in the womb_: _as_ Ætitis, Jasper.

_Provoke the menses._ Ostracites.

    _Stones altering by a hidden property (as they
    call it,) are_

Bezoar, Topaz, Lapis Colubrinus, Toadstone, Emerald, Alectorius,
Calcidonius, Amethist, Saphyr, Jasper, Lapis Nephriticus, Lapis
Tibernum, Lapis, Spongites, the stone found in the maw of a Swallow,
Load-stone, Lapis Vulturis, Merucius, Coral, Lynturius, Jet, Ætites,
the stones of Crabs, Amber, Crystal, &c.

The _Load-stone_ purges gross humours.

_Lapis Armenius_ and _Lapis Lazuli_, purge melancholy.

_Pyrites_ heat and cleanse, take away dimness of sight. _Dioscorides._
Lapis Asius binds and moderately corrodes and cleanses filthy ulcers,
and fills them up with flesh; being mixed with honey, and applied to
the place, is an admirable remedy for the gout.

_Chrystal_ being beaten into very fine powder, and a dram of it taken
at a time helps the bloody-flux, stops the Fluor Albus, and increases
milk in Nurses. _Mathiolus._

_Lapis Samius_ is cooling and binding, it is very comfortable to the
stomach, but it dulls the senses, helps fluxes of the eyes and ulcers.

_Geodetes_ binds and drys, being beaten into powder and mixed with
water, and applied to the place, takes away inflammations of the
Testicles.

_Pumice-stone_ being beaten into powder and the teeth rubbed with it,
cleanses them. _Dioscorides._

_Jet_, it is of a softening and discussing nature, it resists the fits
of the mother.

_Lapis Arabicus_ being beaten into powder, and made into an ointment
helps the hemorrhoids.

_Ostracites_, a dram of it taken in powder provokes the menses; being
taken after that purgation, causes conception, also being made into an
ointment, helps inflammations of the breast.

_Myexis_ being borne about one takes away pains in the reins, and
hinders the breeding of the stone.

_Lapis Armenius_ purges melancholy, and also causes vomiting, I hold
it not very safe for our English bodies, and therefore I will speak no
more of it.

    _Explanation of certain Vacuations._

The five opening Roots.

_Smallage, Sparagus, Fennel, Parsley, Knee-holly._

The two opening Roots.

_Fennel, Parsley._

The five emolient Herbs.

_Marsh-mallows, Mallows, Beets, Mercury, Pellitory of the Wall, Violet
Leaves._

The five Capillary Herbs.

_Maidenhair, Wall Rue, Cetrach, Hart’s-tongue, Politricum._

The four cordial Flowers.

_Borrage, Bugloss, Roses, Violets._

The four greater hot Seeds, Carminative, or breaking wind.

_Annis, Carraway, Cummin, Fennel._

The four lesser hot seeds.

_Bishop’s weed, Amomus, Smallage, Carrots._

The four greater cold seeds.

_Citrul, Cucumber, Gourds, Melon._

The four lesser cold seeds.

_Succory, Endive, Lettice, Purslain._

Five fragments of precious stones.

_Granite, Jacinth, Sapphire, Sardine, Emerald._


    The right worshipful, the College of Physicians of _London_
    in their New Dispensatory give you free leave to distil
    these common waters that follow, but they never intend you
    should know what they are good for.


SIMPLE DISTILLED WATERS.

    Of fresh Roots of

_Briony, Onions, Elecampane, Orris, or Flower-de-luce, Turnips._

    Of flowers and buds of

_Southernwood, both sorts of Wormwood, Wood Sorrel, Lady’s-Mantle,
Marsh-mallows, Angelica, Pimpernel with purple flowers, Smallage,
Columbines, Sparagus, Mouse-ear, Borrage, Shepherd’s Purse, Calaminth,
Woodbine or Honey-suckles, Carduus Benedictus, our Lady’s Thistles,
Knotgrass, Succory, Dragons, Colt’s-foot, Fennel, Goat’s Rue, Grass,
Hyssop, Lettice, Lovage, Toad-flax, Hops, Marjoram, Mallows, Horehound,
Featherfew, Bawm, Mints, Horse-mints, Water Cresses, English Tobacco,
white Poppies, Pellatory of the Wall, Parsley, Plantain, Purslain,
Self-heal, Pennyroyal, Oak leaves, Sage, Scabious, Figwort or
Throatwort, House-leek, or Sengreen, the greater and lesser Mother of
Time, Nightshade, Tansy, Tormentil, Valerian._

    Of Flowers of

_Oranges, (_if you can get them_) Blue-bottle the greater, Beans,
Water-Lilies, Lavender, Nut-tree, Cowslips, Sloes, Rosemary, Roses
white, damask, and red, Satyrien, Lime-tree, Clove-gilliflowers,
Violets._

    Of Fruits of

_Oranges, Black Cherries, Pome Citrons, Quinces, Cucumbers,
Strawberries, Winter Cherries, Lemons, Rasberries, unripe Walnuts,
Apples._

    Of parts of living Creatures and their excrements

_Lobsters, Cockles, or Snails, Hartshorn, Bullocks dung made in May,
Swallows, Earthworms, Magpies, Spawn of Frogs._


       *       *       *       *       *


    SIMPLE WATERS DISTILLED,
    being digested before-hand.

    _Of the fresh Roots of Nettles._

Of the leaves of Agrimony, wild Tansy, or Silverweed, Mugwort, Bettony,
Marigolds, Chamomel, Chamepitys, Celandine, Pilewort, Scurvy-grass,
Comfry the greater, Dandelyon, Ash-tree leaves, Eyebright, Fumitory,
Alehoof, or ground Ivy, Horsetail, St. John’s Wort, Yarrow, Moneywort,
Restharrow, Solomon’s Seal, Res solis, Rue, Savin, Saxifrage,
Hart’s tongue, Scordium, Tamarisk, Mullin, Vervain, Paul’s Bettony,
Mead-sweet, Nettles.

Of the Flowers of Mayweed, Broom, Cowslips, Butter-bur, Peony, Elder.

Of the berries of Broom, Elder.

_Culpeper._] Then the College gives you an admonition concerning these,
which being converted into your native language, is as follows.

    We give you warning that these common waters be better
    prepared for time to come, either in common stills, putting
    good store of ashes underneath, the roots and herbs being
    dryer, &c. or if they be full of Juice, by distilling the
    juice in a convenient bath, that so burning may be avoided,
    which hitherto hath seldom been. But let the other Herbs,
    Flowers, or Roots, be bruised, and by adding Tartar, common
    salt, or leven be digested, then putting spring water to
    them, distil them in an Alembick with its refrigeratory, or
    Worm, till the change of the taste shew the virtue to be
    drawn off; then let the oil (if any) be separated from the
    water according to art.

Into the number of these waters may be ascribed.

The Tears of Vines, the liquor of the Birch-tree, May dew.

_Culpeper._] That my country may receive the benefit of these waters,
I shall first shew the temperatures, secondly, the virtues of the
most usual and most easy to come by: If any should take exceptions
that I mention not all, I answer first, I mention enough. Secondly,
who ever makes this objection, they shew extreme ingratitude; for had
I mentioned but only one, I had revealed more to them than ever the
College intended they should know, or give me thanks for doing.

    _The qualities and appropriation of the simple
    Distilled Waters._

Simple distilled waters either cool or heat: such as cool, either cool
the blood or choler.

_Waters cooling the blood._ Lettice, Purslain, Water Lilies, Violets,
Sorrel Endive, Succory, Fumitory.

    _Waters cooling and repressing choleric humours,
    or vapours in the head._

Nightshade, Lettice, Water Lilies, Plantain, Poppies, _viz._ The
flowers both of white black and red Poppies, black Cheries.

_The breast and lungs._ Violets, Poppies all three sorts, Colt’s-foot.

_In the heart._ Sorrel, Quinces, Water Lilies, Roses, Violets, green or
unripe Walnuts.

_In the stomach._ Quinces, Roses, Violets, Nightshade, Houseleeks, or
Sengreen, Lettice, Purslain.

_In the liver._ Endive, Succory, Nightshade, Purslain, Water Lilies.

_In the reins and bladder._ Endive, Succory, Winter Cherries, Plantain,
Water Lilies, Strawberries, Houseleek or Sengreen, black Cherries.

_In the womb._ Endive, Succory, Lettice, Water Lilies, Purslain, Roses.

Simple waters which are hot, concoct either flegm or melancholy.

    _Waters concocting flegm in the head, are_

Bettony, Sage, Marjoram, Chamomel, Fennel, Calaminth, Rosemary-flowers,
Primroses, Eye-bright.

_In the breast and lungs._ Maiden-hair, Bettony, Hysop, Horehound,
Carduus Benedictus, Scabious, Orris, or Flower-de-luces, Bawm,
Self-heal, &c.

_In the heart._ Bawm, Rosemary.

_In the stomach._ Wormwood, Mints, Fennel, Chervil, Time, Mother of
Time, Marigolds.

_In the liver._ Wormwood, Centaury, Origanum, Marjoram, Maudlin,
Costmary, Agrimony, Fennel.

_In the spleen._ Water-cresses, Wormwood, Calaminth.

_In the reins and bladder._ Rocket, Nettles, Saxifrage, Pellitory of
the Wall, Alicampane, Burnet.

_In the womb._ Mugwort, Calaminth, Penny-royal, Savin, Mother of Time,
Lovage.

    _Waters concocting Melancholy in the head,
    are_

Hops, Fumitory.

_The breast._ Bawm, Carduus Benedictus.

_The heart._ Borrage, Bugloss, Bawm, Rosemary.

_The liver._ Endive, Chicory, Hops.

_The spleen._ Dodder, Hart’s-tongue, Tamarisk, Time.

Having thus ended the appropriation, I shall speak briefly of the
virtues of distilled waters.

_Lettice_ water cools the blood when it is over-heated, for when
it is not, it needs no cooling: it cools the head and liver, stays
hot vapours ascending to the head, and hinders sleep; it quenches
immoderate thirst, and breeds milk in nurses, distil it in _May_.

_Purslain_ water cools the blood and liver, quenches thirst, helps such
as spit blood, have hot coughs, or pestilences.

The distilled water of _water Lily-flowers_ cools the blood and the
bowels, and all internal parts of the body; helps such as have the
yellow jaundice, hot coughs and pleurisies, the head-ache, coming of
heat, fevers pestilential and not pestilential, as also hectic fevers.

The water of _Violet flowers_, cools the blood, the heart, liver and
lungs, over-heated, and quenches an insatiable desire of drinking, they
are in their prime about the latter end of _March_, or beginning of
_April_, according as the year falls out.

The water of _Sorrel_ cools the blood, heart, liver, and spleen: If
Venice Treacle be given with it, it is profitable in pestilential
fevers, distil it in _May_.

_Endive_ and _Succory_ water are excellent against heat in the stomach;
if you take an ounce of either (for their operation is the same)
morning and evening, four days one after another, they cool the liver,
and cleanse the blood: they are in their prime in _May_.

_Fumitory_ water is usual with the city dames to wash their faces with,
to take away morphey, freckles, and sun-burning; inwardly taken, it
helps the yellow jaundice and itch, cleanses the blood, provokes sweat,
strengthens the stomach, and cleanses the body of adust humours: it is
in its prime in _May_ and _June_.

The water of _Nightshade_ helps pains in the head coming of heat. Take
heed you distil not the deadly Nightshade instead of the common, if you
do, you may make mad work. Let such as have not wit enough to know them
asunder, have wit enough to let them both alone till they do.

The water of _white Poppies_ extinguishes all heat against nature,
helps head-aches coming of heat, and too long standing in the sun.
Distil them in _June_ or _July_.

_Colt’s-foot_ water is excellent for burns to wash the place with it;
inwardly taken it helps Phthisicks and other diseases incident to the
lungs, distil them in _May_ or _June_.

The water of _Distilled Quinces_ strengthens the heart and stomach
exceedingly, stays vomiting and fluxes, and strengthens the retentive
faculty in man.

_Damask Rose_ water cools, comforts, and strengthens the heart, so doth
Red Rose-water only with this difference, the one is binding, the other
loosening; if your body be costive, use Damask Rose water, because it
is loosening: if loose, use red, because it is binding.

_White Rose_ water is generally known to be excellent against hot
rheums, and inflammations in the eyes, and for this it is better than
the former.

The water of _Red Poppy flowers_, called by many Corn-roses, because
they grow so frequently amongst corn, cools the blood and spirits
over-heated by drinking or labour, and is therefore excellent in
surfets.

_Green Walnuts_ gathered about the latter end of _June_ or _July_,
and bruised, and so stilled, strengthen the heart, and resist the
pestilence.

_Plantain_ water helps the headache; being dropped into the ear it
helps the tooth-ache, helps the phthisicks, dropsy and fluxes, and is
an admirable remedy for ulcers in the reins and bladder, to be used as
common drink: the herb is in its prime in _May_.

_Strawberry_ water cools, quenches thirst, clarifies the blood, breaks
the stone, helps all inward inflammations, especially those in the
reins, bladder and passages of the urine; it strengthens the liver and
helps the yellow jaundice.

The distilled water of _Dog grass_, or _Couch grass_, as some call it,
cleanses the reins gallantly, and provokes urine, opens obstructions of
the liver and spleen, and kills worms.

_Black Cherry_ water provokes urine, helps the dropsy. It is usually
given in diseases of the brain, as convulsions, falling-sickness, palsy
and apoplexy.

_Betony_ is in its prime in May, the distilled water thereof is very
good for such as are pained in their heads, it prevails against the
dropsy and all sorts of fevers; it succours the liver and spleen,
and helps want of digestion and evil disposition of the body thence
arising; it hastens travail in women with child, and is excellent
against the bitings of venomous beasts.

Distil _Sage_ whilst the flowers be on it, the water strengthens the
brain, provokes the menses, helps nature much in all its actions.

_Marjoram_ is in its prime in June, distilled water is excellent for
such whose brains are too cold, it provokes urine, heats the womb,
provokes the menses, strengthens the memory and helps the judgment,
causes an able brain.

Distil _Camomel_ water about the beginning of June. It eases the
cholick and pains in the belly; it breaks the stone in the reins and
bladder, provokes the menses, expels the dead child, and takes away
pains in the head.

_Fennel_ water strengthens the heart and brain; dilates the breast, the
cough, provokes the menses, encreases milk in nurses, and if you wash
your eyes with it, it clears the sight.

The _Hooves_ of the fore feet of a Cow dried and taken any away,
encrease milk in nurses, the smoke of them drives away mice. _Mizaldus._

_Calaminth_ water heats and cleanses the womb, provokes the menses, and
eases the pains of the head, distil it in May.

The distilled water of _Rosemary flowers_, helps such as are troubled
with the yellow Jaundice, Asthmas, it cleanses the blood, helps
concoction, strengthens the brain and body exceedingly.

Water of the _flowers of Lilies_ of the _valley_, strengthens the brain
and all the senses.

The water of _Cowslip flowers_ helps the palsey; takes away pains in
the head, the vertigo and megrim, and is exceeding good for pregnant
women.

The eyes being washed every morning with _Eyebright_ water, most
strangely clears and strengthens the sight.

_Maidenhair_ distilled in May, the water cleanses both liver and lungs,
clarifies the blood, and breaks the stone.

_Hyssop_ water cleanses the lungs of flegm, helps coughs and Asthmas,
distil it in August.

The water of _Hore-hound_, helps the cough and straitness of the
breast; it strengthens the breast, lungs and stomach, and liver, distil
it in June.

_Carduus_ water succours the head, strengthens the memory, helps such
as are troubled with vertigoes and quartan agues, it provokes sweat,
strengthens the heart, and all other fevers of choler. It is in its
prime in May and June.

_Scabious_ water helps pleurises and pains, and pricking in the sides;
Aposthumes, coughs, pestilences, and straitness of the breast.

Water of _Flower-de-luce_ is very profitable in dropsies, an ounce
being drank continually every morning and evening; as also pains and
torments in the bowels.

_Bawm_ water distilled in May, restores memory, it quickens all the
senses, strengthens the brain, heart, and stomach, causes a merry mind
and a sweet breath.

The water of _Comfrey_ solders broken bones, being drank, helps
ruptures, outwardly it stops the bleeding of wounds, they being washed
with it.

_Wormwood_ water distilled cold, about the end of May, heats and
strengthens the stomach, helps concoction, stays vomiting, kills worms
in the stomach and bowels, it mitigates the pains in the teeth, and is
profitably given in fevers of choler.

_Mint_ water strengthens the stomach, helps concoction and stays
vomiting, distil it in the latter end of May, or beginning of June, as
the year is in forwardness or backwardness, observe that in all the
rest.

_Chervil_ water distilled about the end of May, helps ruptures, breaks
the stone, dissolves congealed blood, strengthens the heart and stomach.

The water of _Mother of Time_ strengthens the brain and stomach, gets a
man a good stomach to his victuals, provoke urine and the menses, heats
the womb. It is in its prime about the end of June.

The water of _Marigold flowers_ is appropriated to most cold diseases
of the head, eyes, and stomach: they are in their vigour when the Sun
is in the Lion.

The distilled water of _Centaury_ comforts a cold stomach, helps in
fever of choler, it kills worms, and provokes appetite.

_Maudlin and Costmary_ water distilled in May or June, strengthens the
liver, helps the yellow jaundice, opens obstructions, and helps the
dropsy.

_Water-cresses_ distilled in March, the water cleanses the blood, and
provokes urine exceedingly, kills worms, outwardly mixed with honey, it
clears the skin of morphew and sunburning.

Distil _Nettles_ when they are in flower, the water helps coughs and
pains in the bowels, provokes urine, and breaks the stone.

_Saxifrage_ water provokes urine, expels wind, breaks the stone,
cleanses the reins and bladder of gravel, distil them when they are in
flower.

The water of _Pellitory of the Wall_, opens obstructions of the liver
and spleen, by drinking an ounce of it every morning; it cleanses the
reins and bladder, and eases the gripings of the bowels coming of wind.
Distil it in the end of May, or beginning of June.

_Cinquefoil_ water breaks the stone, cleanses the reins, and is of
excellent use in putrified fevers. Distil it in May.

The water of Radishes breaks the stone, cleanses the reins and bladder,
provokes the menses, and helps the yellow jaundice.

_Elicampane_ water strengthens the stomach and lungs, provokes urine,
and cleanses the passages of it from gravel.

Distil _Burnet_ in May or June, the water breaks the stone, cleanses
the passages of urine, and is exceeding profitable in pestilential
times.

_Mugwort_ water distilled in May, is excellent in coughs and diseases
proceeding from stoppage of the menses, it warms the stomach, and helps
the dropsy.

Distil _Penny-royal_ when the flowers are upon it: the water heats the
womb gallantly, provokes the menses, expels the afterbirth; cuts, and
casts out thick and gross humours in the breast, eases pains in the
bowels, and consumes flegm.

The water of _Lovage_ distilled in May, eases pains in the head, and
cures ulcers in the womb being washed with it; inwardly taken it expels
wind, and breaks the stone.

The tops of _Hops_ when they are young, being distilled, the water
cleanses the blood of melancholy humours, and therefore helps scabs,
itch, and leprosy, and such like diseases thence proceeding; it opens
obstructions of the spleen, helps the rickets, and hypochondriac
melancholy.

The water of _Borrage and Bugloss_ distilled when their flowers are
upon them, strengthens the heart and brain exceedingly, cleanses the
blood, and takes away sadness, griefs and melancholy.

_Dodder_ water cleanses the liver and spleen, helps the yellow jaundice.

_Tamarisk_ water opens obstructions, and helps the hardness of the
spleen, and strengthens it.

_English Tobacco_ distilled, the water is excellently good for such as
have dropsy, to drink an ounce or two every morning; it helps ulcers in
the mouth, strengthens the lungs, and helps such as have asthmas.

The water of _Dwarf Elder_, hath the same effects.

Thus you have the virtues of enough of cold waters, the use of which is
for mixtures of other medicines, whose operation is the same, for they
are very seldom given alone: If you delight most in liquid medicines,
having regard to the disease, and part of the body afflicted by it,
these will furnish you with where withal to make them so as will please
your pallate best.


    COMPOUNDS. SPIRIT AND COMPOUND
    DISTILLED WATERS.

_Culpeper._] Before I begin these, I thought good to premise a few
words: They are all hot in operation, and therefore not to be meddled
with by people of hot constitutions when they are in health, for fear
of fevers and adustion of blood, but for people of cold constitutions,
as melancholy and flegmatic people. If they drink of them moderately
now and then for recreation, due consideration being had to the part
of the body which is weakest, they may do them good: yet in diseases
of melancholy, neither strong waters nor sack is to be drank, for they
make the humour thin, and then up to the head it flies, where it fills
the brain with foolish and fearful imaginations.

2. Let all young people forbear them whilst they are in health, for
their blood is usually hot enough without them.

3. Have regard to the season of the year, so shall you find them more
beneficial in Summer than in Winter, because in summer the body is
always coldest within, and digestion weakest, and that is the reason
why men and women eat less in Summer than in Winter.

Thus much for people in health, which drink strong waters for
recreation.

As for the medicinal use of them, it shall be shewed at the latter
end of every receipt, only in general they are (due respect had to
the humours afflicting, and part of the body afflicted) medicinal for
diseases of cold and flegm, chilliness of the spirits, &c.

But that my countrymen may not be mistaken in this, I shall give them
some symptoms of each complexion how a man may know when it exceeds its
due limits.

    _Signs of choler abounding._

Leanness of body, costiveness, hollow eyes, anger without a cause, a
testy disposition, yellowness of the skin, bitterness in the throat,
pricking pains in the head, the pulse swifter and stronger than
ordinary, the urine higher coloured, thinner and brighter, troublesome
sleeps, much dreaming of fire, lightning, anger, and fighting.

    _Signs of blood abounding._

The veins are bigger (or at least they seem so) and fuller then
ordinary; the skin is red, and as it were swollen; pricking pains in
the sides, and about the temples, shortness of breath, head-ache, the
pulse great and full, urine high coloured and thick, dreams of blood,
&c.

    _Signs of melancholy abounding._

Fearfulness without a cause, fearful and foolish imaginations, the skin
rough and swarthy, leanness, want of sleep, frightful dreams, sourness
in the throat, the pulse very weak, solitariness, thin clear urine,
often sighing, &c.

    _Signs of flegm abounding._

Sleepiness, dulness, slowness, heaviness, cowardliness, forgetfulness,
much spitting, much superfluities at the nose, little appetite to meat
and as bad digestion, the skin whiter, colder and smoother than it was
want to be; the pulse slow and deep: the urine thick and low coloured:
dreams of rain, floods, and water, &c.

These things thus premised, I come to the matter.

The first the College presents you with, is

    _Spiritus et Aqua Absinthis minus Composita._

Or, Spirit and water of Wormwood, the lesser composition.

_College._] Take of the leaves of dryed Wormwood two pounds, Annis
seeds, half a pound: steep them in six gallons of small wine twenty
four hours, then distil them in an Alembick, adding to every pound of
the distilled water two ounces of the best Sugar.

Let the two first pound you draw out be called Spirit of Wormwood,
those which follow, Wormwood water the lesser composition.

_Culpeper._] I like this distinction of the College very well, because
what is first stilled out, is far stronger than the rest, and therefore
very fitting to be kept by itself: you may take which you please,
according as the temperature of your body, either to heat or cold, and
the season of year requires.

It hath the same virtues Wormwood hath, only fitter to be used by such
whose bodies are chilled by age, and whose natural heat abates. You
may search the herbs for the virtues, it heats the stomach, and helps
digestion.

_The College._] After the same manner (only omitting the Annis seeds)
is distilled spirit and water of Angelica, both Herb and Root, Bawm,
Mints, Sage, &c. the Flowers of Rosemary, Clary, Clove-gilliflowers,
&c. the seeds of Caraway, &c. Juniper-berries, Orange Pills, Lemons,
Citrons, &c. Cinnamon, Nutmegs, &c.

    _Spiritus et Aqua Absynthii magis composita._

Or spirit and water of Wormwood, the greater composition.

_The College._] Take of common and Roman Wormwood, of each a pound;
Sage, Mints, Bawm, of each two handfuls; the Roots of Galanga, Ginger,
Calamus, Aromaticus, Elecampane, of each three drachms; Liquorice, an
ounce, Raisins of the Sun stoned, three ounces, Annis seeds, and sweet
Fennel seeds, of each three drachms; Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each
two drachms; Cardamoms, Cubebs, of each one drachm: let the things
be cut that are to be cut, and the things be bruised that are to be
bruised, all of them infused in twenty four pints of Spanish wine, for
twenty four hours, then, distilled in an Alembick, adding two ounces of
white sugar to every pint of distilled water.

Let the first pint be called Spirit of Wormwood the greater composition.

_Culpeper._] The opinion of Authors is, That it heats the stomach,
and strengthens it and the lungs, expels wind, and helps digestion in
ancient people.

    _Spiritus et Aqua Angelica magis composita._

Or Spirit and water of Angelica, the greater composition.

_The College._] Take of the leaves of Angelica eight ounces, of Carduus
Benedictus six ounces, of Bawm and Sage, of each four ounces, Angelica
seeds six ounces; sweet Fennel seeds nine ounces. Let the herbs, being
dryed, and the seeds be grossly bruised, to which add of the species
called Aromaticum Rosarum; and of the species called Diamoschu Dulce,
of each an ounce and a half, infuse them two days in thirty two pints
of Spanish Wine, then distil them with a gentle fire, and with every
pound mix two ounces of sugar dissolved in Rose-water.

Let the three first pounds be called by the name of Spirit, the rest by
the name of water.

_Culpeper._] The chief end of composing this medicine, was to
strengthen the heart and resist infection, and therefore is very
wholesome in pestilential times, and for such as walk in stinking air.

I shall now quote you their former receipt in their former dispensatory.

    _Angelica water the greater composition._

_The College._] Take of Angelica two pounds, Annis seed half a pound,
Coriander and Caraway seeds, of each four ounces, Zedoary bruised,
three ounces: steep them twenty four hours in six gallons of small
wine, then draw out the spirit, and sweeten it with sugar.

_Culpeper._] It comforts the heart, cherishes the vital spirits,
resists the pestilence, and all corrupt airs, which indeed are the
natural causes of epidemical diseases, the sick may take a spoonful
of it in any convenient cordial, and such as are in health, and have
bodies either cold by nature, or cooled by age, may take as much either
in the morning fasting, or a little before meat.

    _Spiritus Lavendula compositus Matthiæ._
    Or compound spirit of Lavender. Matthias.

_The College._] Take of Lavender flowers one gallon, to which pour
three gallons of the best spirits of wine, let them stand together
in the sun six days, then distil them with an Alembick with this
refrigeratory.

Take of the flowers of Sage, Rosemary, and Bettony, of each one
handful; the flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, Lilies of the Valley,
Cowslips, of each two handfuls: let the flowers be newly and seasonably
gathered, being infused in one gallon of the best spirits of wine,
and mingled with the foregoing spirit of Lavender flowers, adding
the leaves of Bawm, Feather-few, and Orange tree fresh gathered; the
flowers of Stœchas and Orange tree, Bay berries, of each one ounce.
After convenient digestion distil it again, after which add Citron
pills the outward bark, Peony seed husked, of each six drams, cinnamon,
Mace, Nutmegs, Cardamoms, Cubebs, yellow Sanders, of each half an
ounce, Wood of Aloes one dram, the best Jujubes, the stones being taken
out, half a pound, digest them six weeks, then strain it and filter it,
and add to it prepared Pearls two drams, Emeralds prepared a scruple,
Ambergrease, Musk, Saffron, of each half a scruple, red Roses dryed,
red Sanders, of each half an ounce, yellow Sanders, Citron Pills,
dryed, of each one dram. Let the species being tyed up in a rag, be
hung into the aforementioned spirit.

_Culpeper._] I could wish the Apothecaries would desire to be certified
by the College.

1. Whether the gallon of Lavender flowers must be filled by heap,
or by strike. 2. Next, whether the flowers must be pressed down
in the measure or not. 3. How much must be drawn off in the first
distillation. 4. Where they should get Orange leaves and flowers fresh
gathered. 5. What they mean by _convenient digestion_. 6. Where you
shall find Borrage, Bugloss, and Cowslips, flowering together, that
so you may have them all fresh according to their prescript, the one
flowering in the latter end of April, and beginning of May, the other
in the end of June, and beginning of July. 7. If they can make a shift
to make it, how, or which way the virtues of it will countervail the
one half of the charge and cost, to leave the pains and trouble out.

    _Spiritus Castorii._
    Or Spirit of Castoreum.

_The College._] Take of fresh Castoreum four ounces, Lavender flower
an ounce, the tops of Sage and Rosemary, of each half an ounce,
Cinnamon six drams, Mace, Cloves, of each two drachms, spirits of Wine
rectified, six pounds, digest them in a phial filled only to the third
part, close stopped with cork and bladder in warm ashes for two days,
then distilled in Balneo Mariæ, and the distilled water kept close
stopped.

_Culpeper._] By reason of its heat it is no ways fit to be taken alone,
but mixed with other convenient medicines appropriated to the diseases
you would give it for, it resists poison, and helps such as are bitten
by venomous beasts: it causes speedy delivery to women in travail, and
casteth out the Placenta: it helps the fits of the mother, lethargies
and convulsions, being mixed with white wine, and dropped into the
ears, it helps deafness; if stopping be the cause of it, the dose to be
given inwardly is between one dram, and half a dram, according to the
strength and age of the patient.

    _Aqua Petasitidis composita._
    Or, compound water of Butter-bur.

_The College._] Take of the fresh roots of Butter-bur bruised, one
pound and a half, the roots of Angelica and Masterwort, of each half a
pound, steep them in ten pints of strong Ale, then distil them till the
change of the taste gives a testimony that the strength is drawn out.

_Culpeper._] This water is very effectual being mixed with other
convenient cordials, for such as have pestilential fevers: also a
spoonful taken in the morning, may prove a good preservative in
pestilential times: it helps the fits of the mother, and such as are
short winded, and being taken inwardly, dries up the moisture of such
sores as are hard to be cured.

    _Aqua Raphani Composita._
    Or Compound water of Radishes.

_The College._] Take of the leaves of both sorts of Scurvy-grass, of
each six pound, having bruised them, press the juice out of them, with
which mix of the juice of brooklime, and Water-cresses, of each one
pound and a half, of the best white wine, eight pounds, twelve whole
Lemons, pills and all, fresh Briony roots four pound, the roots of wild
Radishes two pound, Captain Winter’s Cinnamon half a pound, Nutmegs
four ounces, steep them altogether, and then distil them.

_Culpeper._] I fancy it not, and so I leave it; I suppose they intended
it for purgation of women in child-bed.

    _Aqua Peoniæ Composita._
    Or Compound water of Peony.

_The College._] Take of the flowers of Lilies of the Valley, one pound:
infuse them in four gallons of Spanish wine so long till the following
flowers may be had fresh.

Take of the fore-named flowers half a pound, Peony flowers four
ounces: steep them together fourteen days, then distil them in _Balneo
Mariæ_ till they be dry: in the distilled liquor infuse again male
Peony roots gathered in due time, two ounces and a half, white Dittany,
long Birthwort, of each half an ounce, the leaves of Misselto of the
Oak, and Rue, of each two handfuls, Peony seeds husked, ten drams, Rue
seeds three drams and a half, Castoreum two scruples, Cubebs, Mace,
of each two drachms, Cinnamon an ounce and a half, Squills prepared,
three drachms, Rosemary flowers six pugils, Arabian Stæchas, Lavender,
of each four pugils, the flowers of Betony, Clove-gilliflowers, and
Cowslips, of each eight pugils, then adding four pound of the juice of
black Cherries, distil it in a glass till it be dry.

    _Aqua Bezoartica._
    Or Bezoar Water.

_College._] Take of the leaves of Celandine, roots and all, three
handfuls and a half, Rue two handfuls, Scordium four handfuls, Dittany
of Crete, Carduus, of each one handful and a half, Zedoary and Angelica
roots, of each three drams, Citrons and Lemon pills, of each six
drams, Clove-gilliflowers one ounce and a half, Red Rose, Centaury the
less, of each two drams, Cinnamon, Cloves, of each three drams, Venice
Treacle three ounces, Mithridates one ounce and a half, Camphire two
scruples, Troches of Vipers two ounces, Mace two drams, Wood of Aloes
half an ounce, Yellow Sanders one dram and a half, Carduus seeds one
ounce, Citron seeds six drams, let them be cut and infused in spirits
of Wine, and Malaga Wine, of each three pound and a half, Vinegar of
Clove-gilliflowers, Juice of Lemons, of each one pound, and distilled
in a glass still in _Balneo Mariæ_, after it is half distilled off, the
residue may be strained through a linen cloath, and be reduced to the
thickness of Honey, and called the Bezoartic extract.

_Culpeper._] Extracts have the same virtues with the waters they are
made from, only the different form is to please the palates of such
whose fancy loathes any one particular form.

This Bezoar water strengthens the heart, arteries, and vital spirits:
It provokes sweat, and is exceeding good in pestilential fevers, in
health it withstands melancholy and consumptions, and makes a merry,
blithe, chearful creature. Of the extract you may take ten grains at a
time, or somewhat more, if your body be not feverish, half a spoonful
of water is sufficient at a time, and that mixed with other cordials or
medicines appropriated to the disease that troubles you.

    _Aqua et Spiritus Lambricorum, magistralis._
    Or Water and Spirit of Earthworms.

_College._] Take of Earthworms well cleansed, three pound, Snails, with
shells on their backs cleansed, two gallons, beat them in a mortar, and
put them into a convenient vessel, adding stinging Nettles, roots and
all, six handfuls, wild Angelica, four handfuls, brank Ursine, seven
handfuls, Agrimony, Bettony, of each three handfuls, Rue one handful,
common Wormwood two handfuls, Rosemary flowers six ounces, Dock roots
ten ounces, the roots of Sorrel five ounces, Turmerick, the inner bark
of Barberries, of each four ounces, Fenugreek seeds two ounces, Cloves
three ounces, Hart’s-horn, Ivory in gross powder, of each four ounces,
Saffron three drams, small spirits of Wine four gallons and a half,
after twenty-four hours infusion, distil them in an alembick. Let the
four first pounds be reserved for spirit, the rest for water.

_Culpeper._] ’Tis a mess altogether, it may be they intended it for an
universal medicine.

    _Aqua Gentianæ compositæ._
    Or Gentian Water compound.

_College._] Take of Gentain roots sliced, one pound and a half, the
leaves and flowers of Centaury the less, of each four ounces, steep
them eight days in twelve pounds of white Wine, then distil them in an
alembick.

_Culpeper._] It conduces to preservation from ill air, and pestilential
fevers: it opens obstructions of the liver, and helps such as they
say are liver-grown; it eases pains in the stomach, helps digestion,
and eases such as have pains in their bones by ill lodging abroad
in the cold, it provokes appetite, and is exceeding good for the
yellow jaundice, as also for prickings or stitches in the sides: it
provokes the menses, and expels both birth and placenta: it is naught
for pregnant women. If there be no fever, you may take a spoonful by
itself; if there be, you may, if you please, mix it with some cooler
medicine appropriated to the same use you would give it for.

    _Aqua Gilbertii._
    Or Gilbert’s Water.

_College._] Take of Scabious, Burnet, Dragons, Bawm, Angelica,
Pimpernel, with purple flowers, Tormentil, roots and all, of each two
handfuls, let all of them, being rightly gathered and prepared, be
steeped in four gallons of Canary Wine, still off three gallons in an
alembick, to which add three ounces of each of the cordial flowers,
Clove-gilliflowers six ounces, Saffron half an ounce, Turmerick two
ounces, Galanga, Bazil seeds, of each one dram, Citron pills one
ounce, the seed of Citrons and Carduus, Cloves of each five ounces,
Hart’s-horn four ounces, steep them twenty four hours and then distil
them in _Balneo Mariæ_: to the distilled water add Pearls prepared,
an ounce and a half, red Coral, Crabs eyes, white Amber, of each
two drams, Crabs claws, six drams, Bezoar, Ambergrease, of each two
scruples, steep them six weeks in the sun, in a vessel well stopped,
often shaking it, then filter it, (you may keep the powders for
Spicord. temp.) by mixing twelve ounces of Sugar candy, with six
ounces of red Rose-water, and four ounces of spirit of Cinnamon with it.

_Culpeper._] I suppose this was invented for a cordial to strengthen
the heart, to relieve languishing nature. It is exceeding dear. I
forbear the dose, they that have money enough to make it themselves,
cannot want time to study both the virtues and dose: I would have
gentlemen to be studious.

    _Aqua cordialis frigida Saxeniæ._

_College._] Take of the juice of Borrage, Bugloss, Bawm, Bistort,
Tormentil, Scordium, Vervain, sharp-pointed Dock, Sorrel, Goat’s Rue,
Mirrhis, Blue Bottle great and small, Roses, Marigolds, Lemon, Citrons,
of each three ounces, white Wine Vinegar one pound, Purslain seeds
two ounces, Citron and Carduus seeds, of each half an ounce, Water
Lily flowers two ounces, the flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, Violets,
Clove-gilliflowers, of each one ounce, Diatrion Sentalon six drams:
let all of them, being rightly prepared, be infused three days, then
distilled in a glass still: to the distilled Liquor add earth of
Lemnos, Siletia, and Samos, of each one ounce and an half, Pearls
prepared with the juice of Citrons, three drams, mix them, and keep
them together.

_Culpeper._] It mightily cools the blood, and therefore profitable
in fevers, and all diseases proceeding of heat of blood; it provokes
sleep. You may take half an ounce at a time, or two drams if the party
be weak.

    _Aqua Theriacalis._
    Or Treacle Water.

_College._] Take of the juice of green Walnuts, four pounds, the juice
of Rue three pounds, juice of Carduus, Marigolds, and Bawm, of each two
pounds, green Petasitis roots one pound and a half, the roots of Burs
one pound, Angelica and Master-wort, of each half a pound, the leaves
of Scordium four handfuls, old Venice Treacle, Mithridates, of each
eight ounces, Canary Wine twelve pounds, Vinegar six pounds, juice of
Lemons two pounds, digest them two days, either in Horse-dung, or in
a bath, the vessel being close shut, then distil them in sand; in the
distillation you may make a Theriacal extraction.

_Culpeper._] This water is exceeding good in all fevers, especially
pestilential; it expels venomous humours by sweat; it strengthens the
heart and vitals; it is an admirable counter-poison, special good for
such as have the plague, or are poisoned, or bitten by venomous beasts,
and expels virulent humours from such as have the venereal disease.
If you desire to know more virtues of it, see the virtues of Venice
Treacle. The dose is from a spoonful to an ounce.

    _Aqua Brioniæ composita._
    Or Briony Water compound.

_College._] Take of the juice of Briony roots, four pounds, the leaves
of Rue and Mugwort, of each two pounds, dryed Savin three handfuls,
Featherfew, Nep, Pennyroyal, of each two handfuls, Bazil, Dittany, of
Crete, of each one handful and a half, Orange pills four ounces, Myrrh
two ounces, Castoreum one ounce, Canary Wine twelve pounds, digest
them four days in a convenient vessel, then still them in _Balneo
Mariæ_: About the middle of the distillation strain it out, and make an
Hysterical extraction of the residue.

_Culpeper._] A spoonful of it taken, eases the fits of the mother in
women that have them; it potently expels the afterbirth, and clears the
body of what a midwife by heedlessness or accident hath left behind; it
cleanses the womb exceedingly, and for that I fancy it much, take not
above a tasterful at a time, and then in the morning fasting, for it is
of a purging quality, and let pregnant women forbear it.

    _Aqua Imperialis._
    Or Imperial Water.

_The College._] Take of dried Citron, and Orange pills, Nutmegs,
Cloves, Cinnamon, of each two ounces, the roots of Cypress, Orris,
Florentine, Calamus Aromaticus, of each one ounce, Zedoary Galanga,
Ginger, of each half an ounce, the tops of Lavender and Rosemary, of
each two handfuls, the leaves of Bay, Marjoram, Bawm, Mints, Sage,
Thyme, of each one handful, the flowers of white and Damask Roses
fresh, of each half a handful, Rose-water four pounds, white Wine eight
pounds, let all of them be bruised and infused twenty four hours, then
distil them according to art.

_Culpeper._] You must distil it in a bath, and not in sand: It comforts
and strengthens the heart against faintings and swoonings, and is held
to be a preservative against consumptions and apoplexies. You may take
half a spoonful at a time.

    _Aqua Mirabilis._

_College._] Take of Cloves, Galanga, Cubebs, Mace, Cardamoms, Nutmegs,
Ginger, of each one dram, Juice of Celandine half a pound, spirits of
Wine one pound, white Wine three pounds, infuse them twenty-four hours,
and draw off two pounds with an alembick.

_Culpeper._] The simples also of this, regard the stomach, and
therefore the water heats cold stomachs, besides authors say it
preserves from apoplexies, and restores lost speech.

    _Aqua Protheriacalis._

_College._] Take of Scordium, Scabius, Carduus, Goat’s Rue, of each two
handfuls, Citron and Orange pills, of each two ounces, the seeds of
Citrons, Carduus, Hartwort, Treacle, Mustard, of each one ounce, the
flowers of Marigolds and Rosemary, of each one handful, cut them, and
bruise them grossly, then infuse them in four pounds of white Wine, and
two pounds of Carduus water, in a glass, close stopped, and set it in
the sun of bath for a fortnight, often shaking it, then distil it in
_Balneo Mariæ_. Let the two first pounds be kept by themselves for use,
and the remainder of the distillation by itself: Lastly, mix one ounce
of Julep of Alexandria, and a spoonful of Cinnamon water with each
pound.

_Culpeper._] _Aqua Protheriacalis_, signifies a water for Treacle, so
then if you put Diascoridum to it, it is a water for Diascoridum; well
then, we will take it for a general water for all physick.

    _Aqua Caponis._
    Or Capon Water.

_College._] Take a Capon the guts being pulled out, cut in pieces, the
fat being taken away, boiled in a sufficient quantity of spring-water
in a close vessel, take of this broth three pounds. Borrage and
Violet-water, of each a pound and a half, white Wine one pound, red
rose leaves two drams and an half, the flowers of Borrage, Violets and
Bugloss, of each one dram, pieces of bread, hot out of the oven, half
a pound, Cinnamon bruised, half an ounce, distil it in a glass still
according to art.

_Culpeper._] The simples are most of them appropriated to the heart,
and in truth the composition greatly nourishes and strengthens such
as are in consumptions, and restores lost strength, either by fevers
or other sickness: It is a sovereign remedy for hectic fevers, and
Marasmos, which is nothing else but a consumption coming from them. Let
such as are subject to these diseases, hold it for a jewel.

    _Aqua Limacum Magistr._
    Or Water of Snails.

_College._] Take of the juice of Ground Ivy, Colt’s-foot, Scabious,
Lungwort, of each one pound and a half, the juice of Purslain,
Plantain, Ambrosia, Paul’s Bettony, of each a pound, Hog’s blood, white
Wine, of each four pounds, Garden Snails, two pound, dried Tobacco
leaves eight, powder of Liquorice two ounces, of Elecampane half an
ounce, of Orris an ounce, Cotton seeds an ounce and a half, the greater
cold seeds, Annis seeds of each six drams, Saffron one dram, the
flowers of red Roses, six pugils, of Violets and Borrage, of each four
pugils, steep them three days warm, and then distil them in a glass
still, in sand.

_Culpeper._] It purges the lungs of flegm and helps consumptions there.
If you should happen to live where no better nor readier medicine can
be gotten, you may use this.

    _Aqua Scordii composita._
    Or Compound Water of Scordium.

_College._] Take of the juice of Goat’s Rue, Sorrel, Scordium, Citrons,
of each one pound, London Treacle, half a pound, steep it three days,
and distil it in sand.

_Culpeper._] A tasterful taken in the morning, preserves from ill airs.

    _Aqua Mariæ._

_College._] Take of Sugar Candy a pound, Canary Wine six ounces, Rose
Water four ounces; boil it well into a Syrup, and add to it Imperial
water two pounds, Ambergreese, Musk, of each eighteen grains, Saffron
fifteen grains, yellow Sanders infused in Imperial water, two drams;
make a clear water of it.

    _Aqua Papaveries composita._
    Or Poppy Water compound.

_College._] Take of red Poppies four pounds, sprinkle them with white
Wine two pounds, then distil them in a common still, let the distilled
water be poured upon fresh flowers and repeated three times; to which
distilled water add two Nutmegs sliced, red Poppy flowers a pugil,
Sugar two ounces, set it in the sun to give it a pleasing sharpness;
if the sharpness be more than you would have it, put some of the same
water to it which was not set in the sun.

    _Aqua Juglandium composita._
    Or Walnut Water compound.

_College._] Take of green Walnuts a pound and an half, Radish roots one
pound, green Asarabacca six ounces, Radish seeds, six ounces. Let all
of them, being bruised, be steeped in three pounds of white Wine for
three days, then distilled in a leaden still till they be dry.


    TINCTURES.

    _Tinctura Croci._
    Or Tincture of Saffron.

_College._] Take two drams of Saffron, eight ounces of Treacle water,
digest them six days, then strain it.

_Culpeper._] See the virtues of Treacle water, and then know that this
strengthens the heart something more, and keeps melancholy vapours
thence by drinking a spoonful of it every morning.

    _Tinctura Castorii._
    Or Tincture of Castoreum.

_College._] Take of Castoreum in powder half an ounce, spirit of
Castoreum half a pound, digest them ten days cold, strain it, and keep
the Liquor for Tincture.

_Culpeper._] A learned invention! ’Tis something more prevalent than
the spirit.

    _Tinctura Fragroram._
    Or Tincture of Strawberries.

_College._] Take of ripe Wood-strawberries two pounds, put them in
a phial, and put so much small spirits of Wine to them, that it may
overtop them the thickness of four fingers, stop the vessel close, and
set it in the sun two days, then strain it, and press it but gently;
pour this spirit to as many fresh Strawberries, repeat this six times,
at last keep the clear liquor for your use.

_Culpeper._] A fine thing for Gentlemen that have nothing else to do
with their money, and it will have a lovely look to please their eyes.

    _Tinctura Scordii._
    Or Tincture of Scordium.

_College._] Take of the leaves of Scordium gathered in a dry time,
half a pound, digest them in six pounds of small spirits of Wine, in a
vessel well stopped, for three days, press them out gently, and repeat
the infusion three times, and keep the clarified liquor for use.

So is made Tincture of Celandine, Rest-harrow, and Rosa-solis.

_Culpeper._] See the herbs for the virtues, and then take notice that
these are better for cold stomachs, old bodies.

    _Tinctura Theriacalis vulgo Aqua Theriacalis
    Ludg. per infus._
    Or Tincture of Treacle.

_College._] Take of Canary Wine often times distilled, Vinegar in which
half an ounce of Rue seeds have been boiled, two pounds choice treacle,
the best Mithridate, of each half a pound; mix them and set them in the
sun, or heat of a bath, digest them, and keep the water for use.

    _Tinctura Cinnamoni, vulgo, Aqua Clareta
    Cinnam._
    Or Tincture of Cinnamon.

_College._] Take of bruised Cinnamon two ounces, rectified spirits of
Wine two pounds, infuse them four days in a large glass stopped with
cork and bladder, shake it twice a day, then dissolve half a pound of
Sugar Candy by itself in two pounds of Rose water, mix both liquors,
into which hang a nodule containing, Ambergris half a scruple, Musk
four grains.

    _Tinctura Viridis._
    Or a green Tincture.

_College._] Take of Verdigris, half an ounce, Auripigmentum six
drams, Alum three drams, boil them in a pound of white Wine till half
be consumed, adding, after it is cold, the water of red Roses, and
Nightshade, of each six ounces.

_Culpeper._] This was made to cleanse ulcers, but I fancy it not.

    _Aqua Aluminosa Magistralis._

_College._] Take of Plantain and red Rose water, of each a pound, roch
Alum and Sublimatum, of each two drams; let the Alum and Sublimatum,
being in powder, boil in the waters, in a vessel with a narrow mouth
till half be consumed, when it has stood five days, strain it.


    PHYSICAL WINES.

    _Vinum Absynthitis._
    Or Wormwood Wine.

_College._] Take a handful of dried Wormwood, for every gallon of
Wine, stop it in a vessel close, and so let it remain in steep: so is
prepared wine of Rosemary flowers, and Eye-bright.

_Culpeper._] It helps cold stomachs, breaks wind, helps the wind
cholic, strengthens the stomach, kills worms, and helps the green
sickness.

Rosemary-flower Wine, is made after the same manner. It is good against
all cold diseases of the head, consumes flegm, strengthens the gums and
teeth.

Eye-bright Wine is made after the same manner. It wonderfully clears
the sight being drank, and revives the sight of elderly men: A cup of
it in the morning is worth a pair of spectacles.

All other Wines are prepared in the same manner.

The best way of taking any of these Wines is, to drink a draught of
them every morning. You may, if you find your body old or cold, make
Wine of any other herb, the virtues of which you desire; and make it
and take it in the same manner.

    _Vinum Cerassorum Nigrorum._
    Or Wine of Black Cherries.

_College._] Take a gallon of Black Cherries, keep it in a vessel close
stopped till it begin to work, then filter it, and an ounce of Sugar
being added to every pound, let pass through Hippocrates’ sleeve, and
keep in a vessel close stopped for use.

    _Vinum Helleboratum._
    Or Helleborated Wine.

_College._] Take of white Hellebore cut small, four ounces, Spanish
Wine two pounds, steep it in the sun in a phial close stopped, in the
dog days, or other hot weather.

    _Vinum Rubellum._

_College._] Take of Stibium, in powder, one ounce, Cloves sliced two
drams, Claret Wine two pounds, keep it in a phial close shut.

    _Vinum Benedictum._

_College._] Take of Crocus Metallorum, in powder, one ounce, Mace one
dram, Spanish Wine one pound and an half, steep it.

    _Vinum Antimoniale._
    Or Antimonial Wine.

_College._] Take of Regulus of Antimony, in powder, four ounces, steep
it in three pounds of white Wine in a glass well stopped, after the
first shaking let the Regulus settle.

_Culpeper._] These last mentioned are vomits, and vomits are fitting
medicines for but a few, the mouth being ordained to take in
nourishment, not to cast out excrements, and to regulate a man’s body
in vomiting; and doses of vomits require a deeper study in physic,
than I doubt the generality of people yet have; I omit it therefore at
this time, not because I grudge it my country, but because I would not
willingly have them do themselves a mischief, I shall shortly teach
them in what diseases vomits may be used, and then, and not till then,
the use of vomits.

    _Vinum Scilliticum._
    Or Wine of Squills.

_College._] Take of a white Squill of the mountains, gathered about the
rising of the dog star, cut it in thin pieces, and dried for a month,
one pound, put it in a glass bottle, and pour to it eight pounds of
French Wine, and when it hath stood so four days, take out the Squill.

The virtues of this are the same with Vinegar of Squills, only it is
hotter.


    PHYSICAL VINEGARS.

    _Acetum distillatum._
    Or distilled Vinegar.

_College._] Fill a glass or stone alembick with the best Vinegar to the
third part, separate the flegm with a gentle fire, then encrease the
fire by degrees, and perform the work.

    _Acetum Rosarum._
    Or Rose Vinegar.

_College._] Take of red Rose buds, gathered in a dry time, the whites
cut off, dried in the shade three or four days, one pound, Vinegar
eight sextaries, set them in the sun forty days, then strain out the
Roses, and repeat the infusion with fresh ones.

After the same manner is made Vinegar of Elder flowers, Rosemary
flowers, and Clove-gilliflowers.

_Culpeper._] For the virtues of all Vinegars, take this one only
observation, They carry the same virtues with the flowers whereof they
are made, only as we said of Wines, that they were better for cold
bodies then the bare simples whereof they are made; so are Vinegars
for hot bodies. Besides, Vinegars are often, nay, most commonly used
externally, viz. to bathe the place, then look amongst the simples,
and see what place of the body the simple is appropriated to, and you
cannot but know both what Vinegar to use, and to what place to apply it.

    _Acetum Scilliticum._
    Or Vinegar of Squils.

_College._] Take of that part of the Squill which is between the
outward bark and the bottom, cut in thin slices, and placed thirty or
forty days in the sun or some remiss heat, then a pound of them (being
cut small with a knife made of ivory or some white wood) being put in
a vessel, and six pounds of Vinegar put to them; set the vessel, being
close stopped, in the sun thirty or forty days, afterwards strain it,
and keep it for use.

_Culpeper._] A little of this medicine being taken in the morning
fasting, and walking half an hour after, preserves the body in health,
to extreme old age, (as _Sanius_ tried, who using no other medicine but
this, lived in perfect health till one hundred and seventeen years of
age) it makes the digestion good, a long wind, a clear voice, an acute
sight, a good colour, it suffers no offensive thing to remain in the
body, neither wind, flegm, choler, melancholy, dung, nor urine, but
brings them forth; it brings forth filth though it lie in the bones, it
takes away salt and sour belchings, though a man be never so licentious
in diet, he shall feel no harm: It hath cured such as have the
phthisic, that have been given over by all Physicians: It cures such
as have the falling sickness, gouts, and diseases and swellings of the
joints: It takes away the hardness of the liver and spleen. We should
never have done if we should reckon up the particular benefits of this
medicine: Therefore we commend it as a wholesome medicine for soundness
of body, preservation of health, and vigour of mind. Thus _Galen_.

    _Acetum Theriacale, Norimberg._
    Or Treacle Vinegar.

_College._] Take of the roots of Celandine the greater, one ounce
and a half: the roots of Angelica, Masterwort, Gentian, Bistort,
Valerian, Burnet, white Dittany, Elecampane, Zedoary, of each one dram,
of Plantain the greater one dram and a half, the leaves of Mousear,
Sage, Scabious, Scordium, Dittany of Crete, Carduus, of each half an
handful, barks and seeds of Citrons, of each half a dram, Bole Amoniac
one dram, Saffron three drams, of these let the Saffron, Hart’s-horn,
Dittany, and Bole, be tied up in a rag, and steeped with the things
before mentioned, in five pints of Vinegar, for certain days by a
temperate heat in a glass well stopped, strain it, and add six drams of
the best Treacle to it, shake it together, and keep it for your use.

    _Acetum Theriacale._
    Or Treacle Vinegar.

_College._] Add to the description of Treacle water, Clove-gilliflowers
two ounces, Lavender flowers an ounce and a half, Rose, and Elder
flower Vinegar, of each four pounds, digest it without boiling, three
days, then strain it through Hippocrates’ sleeve.

_Culpeper._] See Treacle Water for the virtues, only this is more cool,
a little more fantastical.


    DECOCTIONS.

    _Decoctum commune pro clystere._
    Or a common Decoction for a Clyster.

_College._] Take of Mallows, Violets, Pellitory, Beets, and Mercury,
Chamomel flowers, of each one handful, sweet Fennel seeds half an
ounce, Linseeds two drams, boil them in a sufficient quantity of common
water to a pound.

_Culpeper._] This is the common decoction for all clysters, according
to the quality of the humour abounding, so you may add what Simples, or
Syrups, or Electuaries you please; only half a score Linseeds, and a
handful of Chamomel flowers are added.

    _Decoctum Epythimi._
    Or a Decoction of Epithimum.

_College._] Take of Myrobalans, Chebs, and Inds, of each half an
ounce, Stœchas, Raisins of the sun stoned, Epithimum, Senna, of each
one ounce, Fumitory half an ounce, Maudlin five drams, Polipodium six
drams, Turbith half an ounce, Whey made with Goat’s milk, or Heifer’s
milk four pounds, let them all boil to two pounds, the Epithimum
excepted, which boil but a second or two, then take it from the fire,
and add black Hellebore one dram and an half, Agerick half a dram, Sal.
Gem. one dram and an half, steep them ten hours, then press it strongly
out.

_Culpeper._] It purges melancholy, as also choler, it resists madness,
and all diseases coming of melancholy, and therefore let melancholy
people esteem it as a jewel.

    _Decoctum Sennæ Gereonis._
    Or a Decoction of Senna.

_College._] Take of Senna two ounces, Pollipodium half an ounce, Ginger
one dram, Raisins of the sun stoned two ounces, Sebestens, Prunes, of
each twelve, the flowers of Borrage, Violets, Roses, and Rosemary, of
each two drams, boil them in four pounds of water till half be consumed.

_Culpeper._] It is a common Decoction for any purge, by adding other
simples or compounds to it, according to the quality of the humour you
would have purged, yet, in itself, it chiefly purges melancholy.

    _Decoctum Pectorale._
    Or a Pectoral Decoction.

_College._] Take of Raisins of the sun stoned, an ounce, Sebestens,
Jujubes, of each fifteen, Dates six, Figs four, French Barley one
ounce, Liquorice half an ounce, Maiden-hair, Hyssop, Scabious,
Colt’s-foot, of each one handful, boil them in three pounds of water
till two remain.

_Culpeper._] The medicine is chiefly appropriated to the lungs,
and therefore causes a clear voice, a long wind, resists coughs,
hoarseness, asthmas, &c. You may drink a quarter of a pint of it every
morning, without keeping to any diet, for it purges not.

I shall quote some Syrups fitting to be mixed with it, when I come to
the Syrups.

    _Decoctum Trumaticum._

_College._] Take of Agrimony, Mugwort, wild Angelica, St. John’s Wort,
Mousear, of each two handfuls, Wormwood half a handful, Southernwood,
Bettony, Bugloss, Comfrey the greater and lesser, roots and all, Avens,
both sorts of Plantain, Sanicle, Tormentil with the roots, the buds of
Barberries and Oak, of each a handful, all these being gathered in May
and June and diligently dried, let them be cut and put up in skins or
papers against the time of use, then take of the forenamed herbs three
handfuls, boil them in four pounds of conduit water and two pounds of
white Wine gently till half be consumed, strain it, and a pound of
Honey being added to it, let it be scummed and kept for use.

_Culpeper._] If sight of a medicine will do you good, this is as like
to do it as any I know.




    SYRUPS.


    ALTERING SYRUPS.

_Culpeper._] READER, before we begin with the particular Syrups, I
think good to advertise thee of these few things, which concern the
nature, making, and use of Syrups in general. 1. A Syrup is a medicine
of a liquid body, compounded of Decoction, Infusion, or Juice, with
Sugar or Honey, and brought by the heat of the fire, into the thickness
of Honey. 2. Because all Honey is not of a thickness, understand new
Honey, which of all other is thinnest. 3. The reason why Decoctions,
Infusions, Juices, are thus used, is, Because thereby, First, They will
keep the longer. Secondly, They will taste the better. 4. In boiling
Syrups have a great care of their just consistence, for if you boil
them too much they will candy, if too little, they will sour. 5. All
simple Syrups have the virtues of the simples they are made of, and are
far more convenient for weak people, and delicate stomachs.

    _Syrupus de Absinthio simplex._
    Or Syrup of Wormwood simple.

_The College._] Take of the clarified Juice of common Wormwood,
clarified Sugar, of each four pounds, make it into a Syrup according
to art. After the same manner, are prepared simple Syrups of Betony,
